^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL4367  |  2006-12-22 09:39  |  기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PREL KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 노무현 대통령, 매우 솔직한 연설 재현 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 004367 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
 
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 12/10/2014 
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 노무현 대통령, 매우 솔직한 연설 재현
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사.  근거 1.4 (b,d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2013/06/30 14:43//
===== 요점 및 논평 =====

1. (기밀) 12월 21일 노무현 대통령은 민주평화통일 자문회의 연설에서 고건, 김근태, 정동영 전임 장관을 비판하고, 전임 국방장관과 장성에 대해 폭언을 하는 등 성을 내며 도발적인 연설을 하였다. 노무현은 단 20분이 할애된 연설에서 70분을 써가며 6자 회담과 방코델타아시아, 그리고 전작권과 한국의 주권에 대해 즉흥적으로 발언하였다. 발언만큼이나 많은 질문을 던져준 연설에서 노무현은 그의 국내외 정책 결정의 바탕이 되는 원칙과 신념에 대해 "소신껏" 발언하였다. 많은 국민이 참여정부가 의사 결정 과정에 원칙 혹은 분명한 국정 방향이 없다고 느끼는 점을 인식한 노무현은 이번 연설의 목적이 국정운영의 방향이 되는 원칙을 선명히 제시하기 위함이라고 말했다. 노무현은 결국에 국민의 혼란을 더 가중하고 공분을 자초할 수도 있는 까닭은 언론이 또다시 기회를 놓칠세라 자극적인 머리기사를 뽑았기 때문이다. 버시바우 대사는 노무현의 발언이 어조나 내용 면에서 한미동맹에 도움이 되지 않는다고 송민순 외교부 장관에 전달하였다. 송민순는 복기해보면서 노무현의 일부 발언에 관해 설명하려 했다. 노무현의 발언을 발췌한 내용의 비공식 영문 번역본은 6문단을 보라.
===== 송민순 외교부 장관의 반응 =====

2. (기밀) 송민순 외교부 장관과 함께한 회동에서, 버시바우 대사는 노무현의 연설에 대해 우려를 표명하였다. 그는 미국은 믿을 수가 없고, 신뢰할 수 없는 동맹국이며 진전이 없는 6자 회담에 대한 책임이 있다고 시사하는 듯한 일부 발언의 어조로 놀랐다고 송 외교부 장관에게 말하였다. 송 외교부 장관은 해명으로 무마하려는 시도했으며, 일부 논란이 더 심했던 노 대통령의 발언을 되짚어 보기도 하였다. 노 대통령이 한미동맹에 대해 불평하는 게 아님을 미국 정부에 전하기를 바란다고 송민순은 촉구하였다. 오히려 그가 대통령으로서 진행 중인 일이 한미동맹에 나쁘지 않음에도 부당하게 한미동맹을 악화시켰다는 비판을 받는 점을 지적하려는 취지였다. 미국 재무부에 관한 노 대통령의 발언과 관련해, 노 대통령은 국무부는 국제 정치에 한층 관심을 집중한다고 믿었는데, 재무부는 미국법과 규제에 따라 방코델타아시아에 대한 조치를 하고 있음을 지적했다고 송민순은 설명하였다. 송 장관은 노 대통령은 미합중국에 대한 한국민의 심리적 의존성을 한탄하였다고 버시바우 대사에게 말하였다. 우리가 홀로 설 수 있다면 미국에는 더 좋은 동맹국이 될 수 있다. 그렇지 못하면 우리는 당신네 국가에 항상 짐이 될 것이다.

3. (기밀) 송 장관은 한국의 대통령은 견해를 밝힐 때 복잡한 방식으로 말한다고 지적하며, 논란을 사는 머리기사는 노 대통령의 말투에 그 원인이 있다고 했다. 언론은 노 대통령을 부정적 시선으로 보도록 선택적으로 인용함으로써 악용했다고 송민순은 제언했다. 그는 미국이 6자 회담에서 열의와 유연성을 보이도록 매우 힘써 일하고 있으며, 재무부도 방코델타아시아 관련 북한과의 논의에 대해 매우 사무적으로 임해왔다고 12월 21일 그가 노 대통령에게 말했다는 점을 미국 정부에 전달해 달라고 버시바우 대사에게 요청하였다. 그러나 노 대통령과 그는 6자 회담이 앞으로 나아가기 위해선 방코델타아시아 문제를 마무리 짓는 게 매우 중요함을 느끼고 있다고 송민순은 강조하였다.
===== 조태용 국장의 반응 =====

4. (기밀) 조태용 북미국장은 노무현의 연설에 대해 반응으로 노 대통령이 주로 자신의 정책에 비판적인 상대에 대한 비판을 주로 다뤘다고 정치 공사 참사관과 함께한 12월 22일 회동에서 말하였다. 예를 들면 노 대통령은 노 대통령이 추진하는 조기 전작권 이양에 대해 견해를 달리하는 전임 장성들에 대해 대단히 비판적이었다. 게다가 노무현은 자이툰 부대 이라크 파병, 용산기지 재배치, 전략적 유연성 개념을 지원하였다. 그는 미군 부대가 인계 철선으로 이용되어야 한다는 개념을 역시 비판하였다. 본질에서 한미 동맹의 상태가 양호하며 그의 비평가들의 주장과는 반대로 실제 한미 관계가 개선되었다는 점을 피력하고 있다. 이번 연설은 발언이 사전에 준비되지 않은 “전형적인 노무현 연설”이라고 조태용은 말하였다.

5. (기밀) 조태용 국장은 언론이 방코델타아시아에 관한 노무현 대통령의 발언 취지를 잘못 규정하는 건 유감스러운 일이라고 말하였다. 대부분 신문에 설명에 의하면 노 대통령이 방코델타아시아 동결 조치로 9.19 공동성명이 파탄 났다고 말했다. 조태용은 노 대통령이 9.19 공동성명이 “탄생하자마자 땅에 묻혀 버렸지만”이라고 말했지만, 대통령은 곧바로 말을 이어 “봄이 올 것이며” 9.19 공동 성명이 한반도 냉전구조 해체와 평화 구축, 나아가 동북아시아의 다자 안보체제와 평화체제의 방향으로 나아가는 토대로 기능할 거라는 점도 지적하였다. 노 대통령은 9.19 공동 성명은 북핵 문제를 해결하는 기회를 제공했지만, 북한이 금융 문제를 구실로 이행 과정 전반을 미루고 있다고 역시 말하였다. 정치 공사 참사관은 만일 노 대통령이 9.19 공동성명 이행에 대한 미국의 선의에 대해 의구심을 보이기만 해도 6자 회담 관련 한미 공동 노력에 이롭지 않을 거라고 응답하였다. 이번 발언은 최근 하노이 한미 정상회담과도 합치하지 않는다고 정치 공사 참사관은 말하였다. 조태용은 노 대통령이 9.19 공동성명을 충실히 이행한다는 미국 정부의 강력한 결정에 대해 매우 만족하고 있다고 조태용은 주장하였다.
===== 노무현 연설 영어 전문 =====

6. (미분류) 노무현 발언 발췌본 비공식 영문 번역본((번역주: 아래는 노무현 대통령의 발언 원본이다.)):

제가 가장 하고 싶었던 것이 원칙입니다. 그런데 지금 국민들한테 원칙 없는 정부로 인식되고 있습니다. 슬픕니다. 그러나 어쩔 수 있습니까? 슬프다 말하고 또 노여워하면 그것도 문제가 되고 그렇지요.

대통령이 되기 훨씬 전부터 어디 가서 강연할 때 절대로 빠트리지 않는 말 한마디가 신뢰입니다. 민주주의 못해도 신뢰가 있으면 사회가 유지되고, 민주주의를 해도 신뢰가 무너지면 사회가 유지될 수가 없습니다. 그러므로 신뢰를 우리사회에서 최상의 위치에 있는 가치로 본다, 항상 그렇게 얘기를 하고 다녔습니다. 그런데 정책 신뢰성이 계속 문제가 되니까 이 또한 제가 또 부끄러운 일입니다. 일관성과 신뢰라는 것은 사실은 비슷하게 맞붙어 있는 것이지요.

가장 가치 있게 생각하는 원칙들이, 제가 존중하고 꼭 실현하고 싶었던 참여정부 최대의 목표가 지금 이렇게 지적받고 흔들리고 있습니다. 좀더 노력하겠습니다. 아니면 좀더 냉정하게 볼 수 있는 기회가 있을지도 모르겠습니다. 이것은 숙제입니다.
==== 북한 ====

(말씀이 나온 계기에 건의해 주신 부분에 대해서도 이야기하겠습니다. 상호주의에 대칭되는 원칙은 일방주의 아니겠습니까? 그런데 상호주의에 대응하는 참여정부의 정책은 실용주의입니다. 왜냐하면 상호주의라는 것은 형식적이고 경직된 원칙이 될 수 있습니다.)((역주: 영문에서 생략된 부분)) 남북관계를 해 나가는 데 조건과 서로의 처지가 너무 다르고 생각도 다릅니다. 어떤 분이 말씀하는 것처럼 ‘네가 한 대 때리면 나도 한대 때리고 이게 상호주의 아니냐?’ 이렇게 얘기할 수 있지만 남북관계는 그렇게 간단한 것이 아닙니다.

결국 우리가 추구하는 목표인 평화, 신뢰에 맞느냐, 맞지 않느냐를 놓고 그때그때 판단해야지 상호주의라는 원칙에 묶어두면 안됩니다. 결코 일방적인 퍼주기를 하자는 것이 아닙니다. 장기적인 목표를 놓고 신뢰를 확보하고 결국 남북 간 대화로써 보다 큰 목표를 달성할 때까지 어떻게 하는 것이 더 유익한지를 생각해야 합니다. 그래서 상호주의에 대응하는 정책 개념은 실용주의라고 이해해 주십시오.

대북 송금사건 수사에 대해 거부권을 행사하지 않았습니다. 명시적으로 반대의견을 표시한 적도 없습니다. 이것이 많은 논란이 되고 있습니다만, 남북 간 대화와 교류를 하는 데 국민들이 투명성을 요구하기 때문에 저는 국민들의 요구를 받아들였습니다. 우리 사회의 보편적인 추세가 비록 통치행위라 할지라도 투명성과 합법성에 대한 강력한 요구가 있어서 제가 이 점은 참여정부부터 받아들이는 것이 좋겠다고 생각해서 수용했습니다.

사실은 남북관계에서 초법적인 통치행위가 성립할 소지가 전혀 없는 것은 아니라고 생각합니다. 그러나 단 하나, 국민들이 수용해 줄 때만 최고 통치권자의 초법적인 통치행위를 인정할 수 있는 것이지, 국민들이 보편적으로 수용하지 않는 마당이면 어려운 것 아니겠습니까? 잘했는지 못했는지 모르겠습니다만 그 당시저의 선택이었습니다. 이것도 하나의 원칙이라고 말할 수 있는 것 아니겠습니까?

북한에서 대화를 중단했을 때 한국도 중단해 버리고, 일방적 통보가 왔을 때 내가 거절하라고 했습니다. 한 번은 거절했는데, 우리 통일부가 어떻게든 일이 되게 하려는 부처이기 때문에 명시적으로 지시를 해도 해석을 조금 달리해 가지고 어지간하면 대화를 끊거나 하는 일은 하지 않습니다. 저는 그 점을 크게 문책하지 않았습니다. 문책할 일이 아니라고 생각했습니다.

지금도 여러 가지 대북 지원이 중단되어 있습니다. 이것은 원칙이라기보다는 전략적 선택이라고 생각합니다. 지금 대북 지원을 끊고 있는 것은 인도주의 원칙, 상호주의 원칙이라기보다는 그것이 전략적으로 유리하겠다는 판단이 바탕에 깔려 있습니다.

그 외에 동시행동 원칙이나 정부∙민간 분리 원칙, 다 동의합니다. 미국 정부와 의회를 설득해야 된다, 비핵 공영, 이런 이름을 쓰진 않지만 이렇게 가고 있습니다. 이 점에 대해서는 공부해서 좋은 이름을 차용하든지 한번 검토해 보겠습니다.

냉전구조 해체와 평화체제 구축이라는 큰 틀의 합의를 북핵문제 해결과 함께 가야 합니다. 9∙19공동성명에 이 문제가 다 들어 있습니다. 평화체제 협상에 관한 조항, 동북아 다자 안보체제까지 언급되어 있습니다. 9∙19공동성명이 지금 표류하고 있으니까 아무 가치가 없는 것처럼 보일지 모르지만 거기에는 동북아 다자 안보체제라는 새로운 개념이 들어 있습니다.
==== 6자 회담 ====

한국이 북핵문제 해결에 가장 주도적인 역할을 했을 때 9∙19성명이 나왔습니다. 그 뒤에 BDA(방코델타아시아) 문제가 딱 걸렸는데, 참 저도 해석하기 어렵습니다. 중국에서 9∙19성명을 서명하고 있는데 2, 3일 전에 미국 재무부에서는 이미 방코델타아시아에 대한 계좌 동결조치를 해 버린 것입니다.

미국 국무부가 미처 몰랐던 것 아닌가, 베이징에서 모르는 상태에서 그 하루이틀 전에 제재는 나와 버렸고 나온 것을 풀지 못하고 여기까지 와 버린 것 아닌가,이렇게 볼 수도 있습니다. 또 나쁘게 보면‘짜고 치는 고스톱’아니냐, 이렇게도 볼 수 있습니다. 미국 재무부와 국무부 사이에 이 점에 대한 원칙을 해석하는 것이 달라서 정치적 유연성을 발휘할 수 있는 것 아니냐는 생각도 듭니다. 재무부는 법대로 가자고 주장할 것으로 추측이 됩니다만 알 수가 없습니다.

9∙19공동성명이 탄생하자마자 땅에 묻혀 버렸지만, 봄이 오면 싹이 트듯이 한반도 냉전구조 해체와 평화 구축, 나아가 동북아시아의 다자 안보체제와 평화체제의 방향으로 나아가는 디딤돌이 될 수도 있을 것입니다. 그 방향으로 가겠습니다.
==== 대북 정책 ====

대북정책 협의체제, 각계각층의 대표적 지도자나 원로들 모아 놓으면 서로 대화가 잘 안됩니다. 말을 다르게 쓰고 있거든요. 이것이 가장 어렵습니다. 우리가 식민지 시대와 좌우대립을 심하게 겪었고 전쟁까지 치르고 독재라는 세월을 거치는 동안 서로가 서로를 인정하지 못하게 돼 버린 것입니다. 그래서 개념이 달라 언어가 서로 통하지 않습니다.

국민통합, 참 좋은 얘기인데 이것을 못하고 있는 거지요. 제가 이것 한번 해 보자고 맨 처음에 고건 총리를 기용했었지요. 그래서 고건 총리가 다리가 되어서 그쪽하고 나하고 가까워질 것이라는 희망으로 그랬는데, 오히려 저하고 저희 정부에 참여한 사람들이 다 소외되는 그런 체제에 있는 것이지요. 중간에 선 사람이 양쪽을 끌어당기질 못하고 스스로 고립되는 그런 결과가 되기도 하고요. 결과적으로 실패해 버린 인사지요.

링컨 대통령의 포용인사가, 제가 김근태 씨나 정동영 씨를 내각에 기용한 그 정도와 비슷한 수준입니다. 링컨 대통령은 책에 오래오래 남고 남들이 연설할 때마다 그분 포용인사했다고 인용하는데, 저는 비슷하게 하고도 욕만 얻어먹고 사니까 힘듭니다. 링컨 흉내를 내려고 해 봤는데 그게 잘 안되네요. 재미가 별로 없습니다.

여기는 민주평화통일자문회의거든요. 이 사안은 통일∙외교∙안보정책 사안이고, 큰 틀에 있어서 안보의 영역에 포함되는 일이라고 말씀드릴 수 있겠지요. 안보 문제와 표리관계가 있는 것이지요.

우리가 통일을 왜 해야 됩니까? 더 잘살기 위한, 더 사람답게 살기 위한 목표가 있을 것입니다만, 더 절실한 것은 평화를 확보하기 위해서 아니겠습니까? 일단 평화를 확보하는 것이 제일 중요한 문제이고, 그 다음에 이를 통해 우리가 좀더 풍요롭게 살 수 있는 계기가 만들어지면 더 좋은 것이고요. 핏줄을 같이하고, 말을 같이 쓰고, 문화를 함께 하는 사람이 하나로 함께 통합되어서 사는 것이 보다 사람답게 사는 일이라고 생각한다면, 사람답게 살기 위해서 통일해야 되는 것이지요. 그래서 평화입니다.

평화라는 것이 안보의 핵심 개념이거든요. 안보가 뭐냐, 전쟁에서 이기는 것도 안보의 목적이고 평화도 안보의 목적 아닙니까? 그러나 고유의 의미에서 우리가 안보라고 얘기할 때는 평화를 지향하는 국가적 활동이지요. 전쟁에서 이기는 것보다는 전쟁을 예방하는 것이지요. 전쟁에서 이기는 안보보다는 평화를 지향하는 안보라는 개념을 확실히 하면 좋겠습니다.

대화를 지향하는 안보를 해야 됩니다. 안보를 위해서 끊임없이 대결적 분위기를 조성하는 경우가 있습니다. 안보를 튼튼하게 하기 위해 상대를 경계하게 되는 것이지요. 거기에 적대적 감정이 들어가고 불신이 들어가는 것입니다.

안보가 전쟁을 예방하는 것이라면 어느 정도가 전쟁을 예방할 수 있겠습니까? 적이 공격했을 때 완벽하게 제압할 수 있는 수준, 나는 털끝도 안 다치고 아니면 찰과상 정도 입거나 타박상 정도 입고 완전히 제압하는 수준이라면 확실하지요. 안보를 위한 대비가 확실한 것입니다. 적어도 공격을 해서 이길 수 없다, 따라서 점령할 수도 없고 지배할 수도 없는 단계를 한번 생각해 봅시다. 이겨도 점령하지 못하고 점령해도 지배하지 못하면 전쟁을 일으킬 이유가 어디에 있겠습니까? 그런 가능성이 없으면 상식을 가진 사람이면 전쟁을 시작하지 않을 것입니다.

그래서 이기지 못할 수준이면 되지 않겠습니까? 한 대 때리려고 하다가 한 대 반을 맞을 형편이면, 팔 하나 부러트렸는데 자기 팔은 두 개 부러져 버릴 형편이면, 제정신 가진 사람이면 싸움을 하지 않을 것입니다. 목적을 어디까지 둘 거냐, 힘의 비교를 어느 정도에 둘 거냐를 판단해 보고 정신없는 짓 안할 것이라는 전제에서 상대를 평가해 보는 겁니다. 상대가 제정신이 멀쩡한 사람인지, 아니면 믿을 수 없을 만큼 제정신이 아닌 사람인지, 아니면 머리가 아주 나쁜 사람인지를 판단해 봐야 되는 것이지요. 그런데 이런 전제를 할 때 부도덕한 사람, 무슨 짓을 할지 모르는 비정상인 사람으로 전제를 하는 거지요.

그래서 제가 대통령 후보가 됐을 때 패널들이 저한테 ‘노 후보, 김정일이라는 사람이 어떤 사람이오? 합리적인 사람이라고 생각합니까?’물을 때 ‘예’하면 그날로 박살나는 겁니다. ‘아니오’해도 곤란합니다. 이 대답하기 어려운 질문을 하는 것이 한국의 정치 풍토, 정치 문화 아닙니까?

그 사람도 판단력은 있겠지요. 민주주의 사회 기준의 사고력과 분석력을 가지고 있는 판단력인지는 모르겠지만 공산주의 또는 주체사상이라고 하는 그 체제에 맞는 수준과 기준에서는 적어도 판단력이 있지 않겠느냐, 쉽게 말해서 사람이 저 죽을 짓 하겠느냐, 이런 것입니다.

완전히 궁지에 몰리면 무슨 짓을 할지 모른다는 것도 상상할 수 있는 것인데, 죽을 짓까지 무릅쓸 만큼 이상한 사람이냐에 대해서까지는 우리가 합의를 못 이루고 있습니다. 우리 한국 사회가 그 정도 합의가 안되는 겁니다. ‘저 사람 제정신 맞아?’하면 어떤 사람은 설마 제정신이겠지, 어떤 사람은 완전히 정신이상이야, 이런 겁니다. 그래서 ‘멀쩡할걸.’이러면 그날로 박살이 나는 겁니다.

이 기준을 가지고 우리의 안전을 점검하는 것입니다. 전쟁을 예방한다고 할때 어쨌든 전쟁에 이기더라도 많은 손실을 입으니까 안 나게 해야 하는데, 그 억지력의 판단 기준이 정상적인 사람을 기준으로 할 거냐, 돌아버린 사람을 기준으로 할 거냐, 이 문제를 가지고 우리 한국이 얼마만큼 심각하게 싸우고 있는지 아십니까? 신문에 나오는 만화 비슷한 얘기들이 사실은 여기에 근거를 두고 있습니다.

말하자면 제정신 가진 사람이면 지금 한국을 향해서 북이 도발적 행위를 한다는 것은 바로 자살행위나 마찬가지라는 판단을 할 수 밖에 없기 때문에, 안보 문제에 대해서는 적절하게 관리해 나가면 된다는 것이 저의 생각입니다. 그렇지 않다고 생각하는 사람들이 가끔 저희더러 사상 검증을 하자는 거지요. 장관 지명해서 국회 청문회 나가면 ‘6∙25가 남침이오, 북침이오?’묻거든요. 제가 6∙25전쟁이 남침인지 북침인지도 모르는 사람을 장관으로 임명할 만한 사고력을 가진 대통령이라는 전제가 붙어 있지 않습니까? 참 억울합니다. 저는 제정신입니다. 이래서 어렵습니다.

모든 것을 전쟁이나 힘으로 해결할 것이 아니라 대화로써 해야 되는 것입니다. 이 대화의 전제는 민주주의의 기본 원리인 상대방의 존재를 인정하는 것, 나아가 존중하는 것입니다. 상대방의 의견이 옳을 수도 있다는 가능성을 인정해야 됩니다. 내가 틀릴 수 있다는 가능성을 인정해야 됩니다. 이것이 철학적으로 상대주의라는 것 아니겠습니까? 한마디로 ‘관용’이라는 말로 표현될 수 있는 것이지요. 관용이 대화의 전제지요.

대화를 통해서 남북 문제를 풀어 가고 주먹을 꺼내기 전에 먼저 말로 해결하는 것이 대화를 통한 안보 아니겠습니까? 그래서 남북 간 대화하려고 하는데 인간에 대한 인식이 다르다 이거지요.

또 우리 국내에서도 대화를 하려고 하니까 인간에 대한 인식이 다릅니다. 가치에 대한 인식이 다릅니다. 우리나라는 오랫동안 척사위정론이라고 하는 사상체계를 가지고 서학(西學)한다고 수백 명씩 잡아 죽이고, 마침내 1866년 병인사옥 때는 8천 명을 잡아 죽였지 않습니까? 선비정신 같이 좋은 것은 우리가 이어받아야 되겠지만, 우리나라의 전통적 사상에 이 같은 위험한 요소가 내포되어 있었다는 것을 우리가 다시 한 번 돌이켜 봐야 됩니다. 사문난적(斯文亂賊), 척사위정(斥邪衛正) 두 말로 표현되는, 철저히 타도해 버리는 문화를 극복하지 않으면 안됩니다.
==== 안보 ====

안보에 대해 조용히 했으면 좋겠습니다. 정부가 안보, 안보 하고 계속 떠들어야 안심이 되는 국민의식이 정말 힘듭니다.

북한이 미사일을 쐈습니다. 함경북도 앞바다 쪽으로 미사일을 쐈는데, 한국으로 그 미사일이 날아오지 않는다는 것은 명백한 사실이고 다 알고 있는 일 아닙니까? 정치적 정세, 안보적 정세가 장기적으로 총체적으로 서서히 변화해 가는 것이지, 그날 전쟁 나는 것은 아닙니다. 그런데 정부가 나서서 새벽에 비상을 걸고 ‘국민 여러분! 미사일을 쐈습니다. 라면 사십시오. 방독면 챙기십시오.’이렇게 해야 합니까?

아침에 보고를 받았습니다. 긴급히 안보상임회의를 소집하자고 했는데 하지 말라고 했습니다. 국민들을 놀라게 할 이유가 뭐가 있습니까? 그래서 11시에 모여서 관계장관 간담회를 했습니다. 간담회로 하나 상임위원회로 하나 새벽 5시에 모이나 낮 11시에 모이나 그 일 처리에는 아무 차이가 없습니다. 결과적으로 달라지는 것이 없을 뿐만 아니라 예측하는 단계에서 달라지는 게 아무 것도 없습니다. 우리나라 안보, 그렇게 북치고 장구치고 요란 떨지 않아도 충분히 한국의 안전을 지켜낼 만한 국력이 있고 군사력이 있습니다.

국방비 올렸지 않았습니까? 저를 지지했던 많은 사람들은 군비 축소해서 복지에 써야 한다고 얘기했지만 저는 군비를 축소하지 않았습니다. 역사적으로 볼 때 북한에 대한 군사력만이 완전한 것이 아니라고 판단했기 때문입니다.

한국의 군사력이 약해서 중국과 일본의 군사력을 당해내지 못하고 한반도에 힘의 공백 상태가 생기면 임진왜란, 청일전쟁, 러일전쟁처럼 전쟁터로 변할 수 있습니다. 그렇게 되지 않도록 외국 군대가 우리나라에 와서 전쟁을 못하게 할 정도의 국방력을 가지고 있어야 되지 않겠습니까? 중국과 일본, 미국 사이에 중첩적인 잠재적 적대 관계가 동북아시아의 다자안보 체제, 동북아시아 공동체 같은 새로운 구상을 통해서 전환되기 전까지는 한국은 상호주의의 국방력을 가지고 있어야 됩니다.

그래서 국방비를 결코 줄여서는 안된다고 했지만, 대북정책에 대해 국민들을 밤낮없이 불안스럽게 할 이유는 없습니다. 그렇게 하지 않아도 안보 괜찮습니다.

여러분께서 이 자리에서 박수를 쳐 주셨습니다만, 여론조사할 때는 전부 가위표를 치셨을 겁니다. 여론조사 결과를 보니까 네 편 내 편 할 것 없이 전부 잘못 했다고 다 가위표를 쳐 놨는데 정말 정치라는 것이 어렵구나, 양심껏 소신껏 했는데 그렇게 하면 판판이 깨지는 것이 정치구나, 그런 생각을 가지고 있습니다.

그러나 이대로 계속 갈 수 없습니다. 달라질 것은 달라져야 하기 때문에 터질 때는 터지더라도 다르게 할 건 다르게 하겠습니다. 그게 단임 정신 아니겠습니까.

(고향 친구들 만나기가 제일 미안합니다. 고향 친구, 학교 동창들은 저 대통령 만들려고 다니면서 친구들한테 표 찍으라고 했는데 지금은 몰리고 있으니까, 어디 술자리 가서 괴롭기 짝이 없지요. 그런 애로사항은 있습니다만, 그 사람들 체면보다 더 큰 게 국가의 미래라고 생각해서 그렇게 하기로 했습니다.)((번역 주: 영문 번역에 생략된 부분))
==== 한미동맹 ====

원론적으로 몇 가지 말씀 드렸습니다만 실례를 들어서 얘기를 하겠습니다. ‘이라크 파병 왜 했냐.’이런 얘기가 나올 수 있지요. 또 ‘미국하고 왜 껄끄러워졌냐.’고 묻기도 합니다. 저는 껄끄러워지지 않았다고 생각합니다만 그렇게 묻는 사람들이 있습니다.

맨 처음 대통령에 당선됐을 때 북핵문제를 놓고 북한에 대한 무력공격설이 미국 신문과 우리 신문에 난무했습니다. 책임 있는 사람들이 말했다. 안했다는 것이 중요한 것이 아니고 신문에 난무하면 거기에 대해 국민들은 불안감을 느끼게 되는 겁니다.

그래서 ‘무력공격은 안된다.’고 얘기했습니다. 그랬더니 ‘그러면 미국하고 일 생긴다.’면서 우리나라의 안보와 안보논리를 주도해 왔던 사람들이 ‘큰일 났다.’고 했습니다. ‘노무현이 미국하고 관계를 탈내겠다.’고 그러는 겁니다. 그러나 그 이전에 ‘어떻든 전쟁은 안된다.’했습니다.

왜 그렇게 했겠습니까? 여러분이 지금 그런 대로 쓸 만한 사람인지, 아닌지를 검증하는 방법이 있습니다. 옛날에 사귀던 친구 보고 우리 집에 놀러 오라고 했을 때 놀러 오면 내가 아직도 괜찮은 사람이라는 겁니다. 돈 좀 꿔 달라고 해서 돈 빌려 주면 그거 아주 괜찮은 사람입니다. 돈 안 빌려 주면 ‘내가 요새 한물가는구나.’이렇게 생각해야지요.

한국이 괜찮은 나라라면 여행하는 사람이 많이 오고, 돈 빌려 주는 사람이나 투자하는 사람이 있게 돼 있습니다. 그런데 제가 대통령에 당선됐을 때 ‘투자가 끊어질 거다. 돈 빌리러 갔더니 가산금리를 더 내라 한다.’고 했습니다. 이 말은 한국에 돈 빌려 주기 싫다는 것과 같은 겁니다. 국가가 돈을 빌릴 수 없게 되면 그때부터 위기로 갑니다. 돈 빌려 달라 했을 때 안 빌려 주면 그때부터 철저히 단속하고 재빨리 신용을 회복하지 못하면 바로 1997년 외환위기 같은 사태로 굴러 떨어질 가능성이 있습니다.

대통령은 미국을 한 번도 안 가 본 사람으로 바뀌었고 ‘전쟁은 난다.’하는 상황이었습니다. 제가 안팎곱사등이가 됐지요. 북핵문제를 가지고 전쟁은 없다 해야 했습니다.

두 번째로는 미국하고 관계가 돈독해야 하는 것이지요. 돈 빌려 주고 투자하는 사람들이 모여서 제일 처음 묻는 것이 ‘전쟁하냐, 북한이 붕괴하냐.’는 것이었습니다. 절대 그런 일 없다고 얘기해 놓고 나니까 ‘미국하고 잘 지낼 거냐.’이렇게 물었습니다. ‘잘 지낸다, 괜찮다.’고 하는 사람들이 있고 ‘큰일 났다.’고 하는 사람들이 있지요. 미국에서 ‘큰일 났다.’고 하는 사람들이 있었는데 노무현 길들이기 프로그램에 그런 내용이 들어 있기도 하지 않았겠습니까? 천지도 모르고 겁없이 대통령이 된 모양인데 ‘맛 좀 보여야지.’라고 생각한 모양입니다. 그래서 ‘한∙미관계가 나빠진다.’고 계속 신호 보내서 ‘노무현 기 좀 꺾어라.’이거 아니겠습니까? 그런 것이 그때의 상황이었습니다.

그때 제가 해야 되는 것이 ‘전쟁 없다.’이고 또 하나는 ‘미국하고 괜찮다.’는 것이지요. 가장 확실한 증명이 이라크 파병 아닙니까? 개인 노무현과 미국의 관계가 아니라 대한민국과 미국의 우호동맹관계가 지속적으로 작동하느냐, 안하느냐의 바로미터였기 때문에 이라크 파병을 했습니다. 1만 명 보내자는 사람, 5천명 보내자는 사람이 있었고, 전투병 보내는 것이 당연하다는 사람들도 있었습니다. 또 그 전쟁의 명분에 대해서 의문을 제기하면서 반대하는 분들도 많이 있었습니다. 그래서 비전투병 3천 명을 보냈습니다. 장사로 치면 장사 참 잘했다고 생각하는데 어떻습니까? 한∙미동맹의 목표를, 한∙미동맹의 안전성에 대한 국제적신뢰라고 하는 목표를 가장 적은 비용으로 달성하는 것이 가장 효과적인 것 아니겠습니까?

2사단 후방배치에 대해 미국이 얘기를 했습니다. ‘안된다, 인계철선을 가지고 가면 어떻게 하냐.’고 말하는 분이 정부 안에서도 있었습니다. 그래서 ‘그 말 하지 마시오. 미2사단 뒤로 물리시오.’라고 말했습니다. 그래서 시비가 많이 붙었어요. 한쪽에선 미2사단 물리고 나서 북한이 밀고 들어오면 어떻게 하느냐는 것이지요. 미국이 자동 개입이 안되니까 안 도와줄지 모른다는 것입니다. 다른 쪽에선 미국이 북한을 공격하면 북한이 전방에 있는 2사단에 즉각 보복할 텐데, 2사단을 빼면 보복할 데가 없어졌으니까 미국이 북한을 때리기 위한 사전준비 작업을 하는 것 아니냐는 시각이 있었습니다. 그래서 2사단 후방배치에 대해 떨떠름하게 반대하는 사람들이 있었습니다. 반미주의자들이 있어요.
 
그런데 옮겨야지오. 여기에 원칙이 들어가는 것입니다. 한국군 방위력이 어느 정도인지 정직하게 평가합시다. 언제 역전된 것으로 생각하십니까? 대개 1970년대 후반, 1980년대 초반 때 실질적으로 역전된 것으로 보지 않습니까? 국방력,경제력 역전이 1985년이라고 잡아봅시다. 1985년에 역전됐으면 지금 20년이 지났습니다.

우리가 북한 국방비의 여러 배를 쓰고 있습니다. 이게 한두 해도 아니고 근 20년간 이런 차이가 있는 국방비를 쓰고 있습니다. 그래도 지금까지 한국의 국방력이 북한보다 약하다면 그 많은 돈을 다 어떻게 했습니까? 1970년대는 어떻게 견뎌왔습니까? 옛날 국방장관들 나와서 얘기하는데 그 사람들이 직무유기한 것 아닙니까? 그 많은 돈을 쓰고도 북한보다 약하다면 직무유기한 거지요. 정직하게 보는 관점에서 국방력을 비교하면 이제 2사단 뒤로 나와도 괜찮습니다.

기왕에 있는 건데 그냥 쓰지, 인계철선으로 놔두지 왜 시끄럽게 옮기느냐고 할수도 있습니다. 시끄럽게 안하고 넘어가면 좋은데 왜 그걸 옮기는 데 동의했느냐, 심리적 의존상태를 벗어나야 한다는 겁니다. 국민들이 내 나라는 내가 지킨다는 의지와 자신감을 가지고 있어야 국방이 되는 것입니다.

미국한테 매달려서, 미국 뒤에 숨어서 ‘형님만 믿겠다.’이런 것이 자주국가 국민들의 안보의식일 수가 있겠습니까? 인계철선이란 말 자체가 염치가 없지 않습니까? 남의 나라 군대를 가지고 왜 우리 안보를 위한 인계철선으로 써야 합니까? 피를 흘려도 우리가 흘려야지요. 그런 각오로 우리가 할 수 있다는 자신감을 가져야 합니다.

미국과 우리 사이에 경제적인 일이나 다른 일이 있어 미국이 ‘그러면 우리 군대 뺍니다.’라고 나올 때 이 나라의 대통령이 당당하게 ‘그러지 마십시오.’라든지, ‘ 예 빼십시오.’라든지 할 수 있어야 말이 될 것 아니겠습니까? 미국이 ‘난 나가요.’하면 다 까무러치는데, 대통령 혼자서 어떻게 미국하고 대등한 관계를 맺을 수 있겠습니까?

완전하게 대등한 외교는 할 수 없습니다. 미국은 초강대국입니다. 미국의 세계 영향력에 상응하는 대우를 해 줘야 합니다. 동네 힘센 사람이나 돈 많은 사람이 ‘길 이렇게 고치자, 둑 고치자, 산에 나무 심자.’하면 어지간한 사람은 따라가는 거죠. 미국이 주도하는 질서를 거역할 수는 없습니다.

그러나 최소한 자주국가, 독립국가로서의 체면은 유지해야 될 것 아니겠습니까? 2사단 빠지면 다 죽는다고 사시나무처럼 떠는 나라에서 대통령이, 또 외교부 장관이 미국 공무원들하고 만나서 대등하게 대화를 할 수 있겠습니까? 심리적인 의존관계를 해소해야 됩니다. 그래서 뺐습니다.

조금 있으니까 미국이 주한미군 숫자도 좀더 감축하자고 제안했습니다. 그래서 ‘하시오.’했습니다. ‘비공개로 논의하자.’고 하는 걸 ‘공개로 합시다.’고 했습니다. 그러면 연기하자고 해서 1년 연기해 감축 논의를 했습니다. 그런데 결국 감축 얘기가 미국 쪽에서 먼저 나왔잖아요? 자기들이 연기하자 해 놓고 왜 그러냐고 했더니 우리 쪽에서 연기하자 했다고 옥신각신하는데 조사를 못해 봤습니다. 하여튼 감군 좀 해도 괜찮습니다.

용산기지를 왜 이전하느냐 하면, 그 땅은 비싼 땅입니다. 약간 차이는 있을 수 있지만 5조 5천억 원 정도 되는 무척 비싼 땅인데, 그 땅을 돈 주고 산다고 생각해 보십시오. 5조 5천억 원에 살 수 있겠습니까? 여러분, 그게 미군 부대가 아니고 개인의 잡종지였다면 절대 수용도 안됩니다. 그 좋은 금싸라기 땅에 미군이 딱 버티고 앉아서 지하철도 못 내고 도로도 못 내고, 우리 국민들이 함께 즐길 수 있는 문화시설이나 상업시설을 왜 못 만드느냐 이거지요.

투자를 해야지요. 돈 없어서 안했습니다. 김영삼, 노태우 대통령이 합의해 놨는데, 김영삼 대통령도 돈이 없어서 안해 버리고, IMF 나서 국민의 정부도 못했습니다. 우리는 한고비 넘어갔으니까, 그것도 1년에 내는 것도 아니고 10년에 걸쳐 점진적으로 내는 건데, 사야지요. 이거면 누가 시비하지 않을 것으로 생각했습니다만 이것 때문에 평택에서 얼마나 시끄러웠습니까. 국민들이 노무현 정부는 ‘왜 이렇게 시끄럽냐.’고 하지만 할 일은 해야 되지 않습니까? 그렇게 된 것입니다.

용산기지는 우리 국민들 가슴속에 자주국가의 상징이란 측면에서 상당한 손상을 주고 있는 것이 사실입니다. 아무리 우방이라 할지라도 수도 한복판에, 그것도 청나라 군대가 주둔했던 그 자리에 하필이면 있어야 되겠느냐는 문제입니다. 옛날에 우리나라 독립협회가 모화관이 있던 자리를 헐어버리고 독립문을 세운 것은 그것이 현실적이든 아니든 간에 역사적으로 상징성이 있지 않습니까? 용산기지 이전도 그와 마찬가지로 역사적 행위가 되는 것입니다. 명분은 자주국가의 당연한 이치라는 것이죠.

작통권도 마찬가지입니다. 우리가 작전을 통제할 만한 실력이 없습니까? 그렇다면 대한민국 군대는 지금까지 뭐 했습니까? 저도 군대 갔다 왔고 예비군 훈련까지 다 받았고 세금도 냈는데, 그 위의 사람들은 뭐 했습니까? 작전통제도 제대로 할 수 없는 군대를 만들어 놓고 ‘나 국방 장관이오, 나 참모총장이오.’그렇게 별들 달고 거들먹거리고 말았다는 얘깁니까? 작통권 가져오면 안된다고 줄줄이 몰려가서 성명 내고, 직무유기 아닙니까? 이렇게 수치스러운 일들을 했으면 부끄러운 줄 알아야 합니다.

작통권 돌려받으면 우리 국군 잘합니다. 경제도 잘하고 문화도 잘하고 영화도 잘하고, 한국 사람들이 외국 나가 보니까 못하는 게 없습니다. 전화기도 잘 만들고 자동차도 잘 만들고 배도 잘 만들고, 못하는 게 없는데 왜 작전통제권만 못한다는 겁니까?

실제로 남북 간 대화가 있고 한국과 중국 사이에도 외교가 있습니다. 한국군이 작전통제권을 가지고 있어야 중국과 우리가 동북아시아의 안보문제를 놓고 대화를 할 때 그래도 한국의 발언권이 좀 높아지지 않겠습니까? 작전통제권도 없는 나라가, 어느 시설에 폭격할 것인지도 마음대로 결정 못하는 나라가 그 상황에서 중국한테 무슨 할 말이 있겠습니까? 북한한테 무슨 할 말이 있겠어요. 이것은 외교상의 실리에 매우 중요한 문제입니다. 유사시가 없을 거니까 그런 걱정 할 것 없다고도 하는데, 그럴 바에야 작전통제권이 무슨 필요가 있겠습니까?

몰라서 딴소리하는 건지 알고도 딴소리하는 건지 모르지만 나는 그분들이 외교∙안보의 기본원칙, 기본원리조차도 모른다고 생각하지 않습니다. 명색이 국방부 장관을 지낸 사람들이 북한 유사시에 한∙중 간 긴밀한 관계가 생긴다는 사실을 모를 리 있겠습니까? 그런데 알았다면 왜 작전통제권 환수를 할 엄두를 지금까지도 안 내고 가만 있었을까, 불가사의한 일입니다. 모든 것이 노무현 하는 것을 반대하면 다 정의라는 것 아니겠습니까?

전략적 유연성 문제의 핵심은 그렇습니다. 우리가 이것을 동의하고 안하고 현실적으로 외교적인 문제입니다. 동북아시아의 유사시에 주한미군이 여기에 있더라도 중국과 동북아시아 문제에 대해 긴장이 조성되는 행위는 신중히 하겠다는 합의가 되어 있습니다. 미리 다 정해 놓을 것이 아니라 그때 가서 언제든지 우리 나라가 동의하지 않는 것은 안된다고 되어 있습니다. 그러면 동의하는 것은 된다, 이런 것입니다. 그것이 제일 좋은 것 아니겠습니까?
 
지금 정해 놔 봤자 그때 상황이 어떻게 될지 모르는데, 그때 우리 한국 국민들 이 합의하고 동의하면 무슨 일이든 하는 것이고, 안된다 하면 못하는 게 가장 좋은 것 아닙니까? 지금 정해 놓을 수가 없지요. 이 문제 가지고 부시 대통령 만나서 토론도 하고 많이 했습니다. 다 정리됐습니다.

국방개혁에는 철학이 있습니다. 노태우 대통령 때부터 거론되고 김영삼 대통령 때도 이야기되고 국민의 정부에서도 계획까지 짰다가 무산되어 버린 국방개혁이 이제 겨우 법이 통과됐습니다. 지시해 놓으니까 안 만들어 와요. 누가 개혁 좋아하겠습니까? 자기 조직 살 깎는 일인데, 그렇지 않습니까? 대통령이 다만들 수도 없고 결국 국방부, 그리고 군에서 다 만들어서 국민들 앞에 발표했습니다.

‘국방개혁 2020’, 돈 특별히 더 드는 것 없습니다. 50만으로 줄입니다. 인력을 더 줄일 수 있습니다. 왜 인력을 줄이고 무기를 늘리는지 설명하겠습니다. 북한하고만 싸우려면 지상전이 많을 수도 있으니까 숫자가 많아야지요. 그러나 우리안보를 전방위 안보로 생각한다면 숫자로는 안됩니다. 밥 먹이고 옷 입히고 막사짓고 사람한테 들어가는 것을 다 아끼고 아주 성능 좋은 무기를 개발해야 됩니다. 국방개혁이라는 것이 그런 것이지요.

요새 아이들도 많이 안 낳는데, 군대에서 몇 년씩 썩지 말고 그동안 열심히 활동하고 장가를 일찍 보내야 아이를 일찍 낳을 것 아닙니까? 모든 사회제도를 장가 일찍 가고 시집 일찍 가는 제도로 바꿔야 합니다. 결혼 빨리 하기 제도, 직장에 빨리 취업하는 제도로 바꿔 주지 않으면 경제적으로 다 지체가 됩니다. 지금 그 계획을 세우고 있습니다.

얼마 전에 군 장성들 임명하고 차를 한 잔 하는 자리에서 ‘노무현 대통령 되고 난 뒤에 대한민국 군대가 나빠진 게 뭐 있으면 얘기해 보시오.’라고 말했습니다. 설마 있어도 말하겠습니까? 여러분이 대신 한번 얘기를 해 주세요. 대한민국 군대, 노무현 대통령이 더 나쁘게 한 것이 뭐가 있습니까?

장성 인사를 몇 번씩이나 했는데, 신문에 한 줄도 쓸 것이 없어요. 요새 신문 기자들 쓸 것이 없어서 힘들어요. 공중조기경보통제기를 사기 위해 1조 4천억 원짜리 방산 계약을 했는데도, 부패니 뒷거래니 한마디도 없지 않습니까?

군 안에서 자살사고∙총기사고 많이 났습니다. 앞으로 고쳐 가야겠지요. 아주 노력해서 빨리 고치겠습니다. 문화라는 것은 하루이틀에 고쳐지는 것이 아니지요. 그래도 지금 군 인사, 군수조달, 군내 예산 집행의 투명성, 이런 것들은 대폭 달라졌습니다. 병영생활 문화도 아주 빠르게 개혁되고 있습니다. 지금 민자 유치해서 막사 전부 다 고쳤습니다. 평등권 문제가 걸리기 때문에 애로가 있지만 전역군인들 취업하는 것, 대책을 세워 줘야 군 구조를 개혁할 것 아니겠습니까? 지금 최선을 다해 노력하고 있습니다.

어떻든 국방부 문민화, 민간인 국방 장관을 임명하는 문제는 좀 뒤로 미루었습니다. 한꺼번에 다 그렇게 해 놓으면 어지러워서 안될 것 같다는 판단 때문이었습니다.

사회개혁도 제가 하는 게 좀 빠른가 봐요. 전부 어지럽다고 그래요. 그래서 국방부 문민화까지 한꺼번에 해치우면 곤란할 것 같아 ‘문민화는 다음에 합시다.’고 했습니다. 장관 임명하는 것만 하면 되는 거니까요. 그러나 중차대한 개혁을해야 되는 시기에 대통령이 군인들한테 신뢰를 주고 자발적으로 ‘스스로 해 보시오.’하는 게 좋을 것 같아 문민화는 뒤로 미루고 군 개혁은 확실하게 합니다. 그렇게 해서 안보 문제는 잘될 것입니다.

그 다음에 나머지 여러 가지가 있습니다. 대통령이 잘한다 못한다 말 많고 이것은 왜 이랬냐고 하는 말이 많습니다. 시어머니가 앉아서 며느리 밥상 차려 오는데 잔소리하려면 잔소리할 거리가 없겠어요?

짚어야 될 것은 대개 짚고 있습니다. 개인적으로 누구 봐줄 일도 없고 뒷돈 챙길 일도 없습니다. 국가 잘되게 원칙대로 하는 것 말고는 다른 할 일도 없습니다. 기왕에 뽑아 놨는데 국방∙외교∙안보∙통일 저에게 다 이렇게 맡겨 주라고, 여러분이 말 좀 한번 해 주십시오. ‘앞뒤 재고 챙길 것은 챙기는 것 같더라, 맡겨 봐라.’라고 해 주십시오. 부탁합니다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/5/06seoul4367|프와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
==== 노무현 대통령 민주평통 자문회의 연설 (06.12.21) 영상(9분 35초부터 보시라) ====
{{youtube>FpFEnYgVM4g?t=9m36s?large|9분 36초부터}}
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL4367.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 004367 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PREL [External Political Relations], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT ROH SPEEKS VERY FRANKLY, AGAIN 
 
Classified By: Amb. Alexander Vershbow.  Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
SUMMARY AND COMMENT 
------------------- 
 
¶1.  (C) President Roh Moo-hyun delivered angry and 
provocative remarks on December 21 to National Unification 
Advisory Council, criticizing three former Ministers, Goh 
Kun, Kim Geun-Tae and Chung Dong-young and railing against 
former defense ministers and generals.  Taking 70 minutes to 
deliver remarks that were only allotted 20 minutes, Roh spoke 
extemporaneously about the Six Party Talks and BDA, wartime 
operation control (OPCON) and the country's sovereignty.  In 
an address that offered as many questions as statements, Roh 
appeared to be "thinking out loud" as he spoke about the 
principles and beliefs that serve as the basis of his 
domestic and foreign policy decisions.  Roh's stated purpose 
of the speech was to clarify the principles that were guiding 
the government, recognizing that many in the public feel the 
government is without principles, or clear direction, in its 
decision-making process.  In the end, Roh may have done more 
to confuse and enrage the public as the press once again 
seized the opportunity for controversial headlines.  The 
Ambassador conveyed to FM Song Min-soon that these remarks, 
both in tone and substance, were not helpful for the U.S.-ROK 
alliance.  Song attempted to walk back and explain some of 
Roh's remarks.  See paragraph 6 for an unofficial English 
translation of excerpts from Roh's remarks. 
 
FOREIGN MINISTER SONG MIN-SOON'S RESPONSE 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) In a meeting with Foreign Minister Song Min-soon, the 
Ambassador expressed concerns about Roh's speech.  He told 
the Foreign Minister he was surprised by the tone of some of 
the remarks that seemed to indicate the United States could 
not be trusted, was an unreliable alliance partner, and was 
responsible for the lack of progress in the Six-Party Talks. 
FM Song responded with an attempt to explain away and walk 
back some of President Roh's more controversial statements. 
Please tell Washington that President Roh was not complaining 
about the Alliance, Song urged.  Rather, he meant to point 
out that what he was doing as President was good for the 
Alliance, but that he had been unduly criticized for causing 
the Alliance to deteriorate.  Regarding the President's 
comments about the U.S. Department of the Treasury, President 
Roh had pointed out that Treasury was acting in accordance 
with U.S. laws and regulations in the Banco Delta Asia (BDA) 
case, Song explained, while he believed the State Department 
was focused more on international political considerations. 
FM Song told the Ambassador that President Roh lamented the 
Korean people's psychological dependence on the United 
States.  When we can stand alone we can be better allies to 
the United States.  Otherwise we will always be a burden to 
you. 
 
¶3.  (C) FM Song attributed the controversial headlines to 
President Roh's speaking style, noting that the Korean 
president speaks in a complicated way when expressing his 
views.  The press exploited that by selecting quotes that 
made the president look negative, Song suggested.  He asked 
the Ambassador to convey to Washington that he (Song 
Min-soon) had told President Roh on December 21 that the 
United States is working very hard and showing flexibility 
and enthusiasm at the Six-Party Talks and that Treasury has 
been very businesslike in its discussions with the DPRK on 
the BDA issue.  Song stressed, however, that both he and 
President Roh felt it was very important to get the BDA issue 
behind us in order to move the Six-Party process forward. 
 
DIRECTOR GENERAL CHO TAE-YONG'S RESPONSE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) In response to Roh's speech, North America Division 
Director General Cho Tae-yong said in a December 22 meeting 
with Political M/C that President Roh was mainly concerned 
with criticizing those who had been critical of his policies. 
 For example, the President was highly critical of the former 
generals who disagreed with the Roh's push to transfer OPCON 
at an early date.  In addition, Roh supported the Zaytun 
deployment to Iraq; the relocation of Yongsan Garrison; and 
the concept of strategic flexibility.  He also criticized the 
notion that U.S. troops should be used as trip wire.  In 
essence, President Roh was making the case that the alliance 
was in good shape and that, contrary to the assertions of his 
critics, he had actually improved the relationship.  Cho said 
that this speech, delivered without prepared remarks, was a 
"quintessential Roh speech." 
 
¶5.  (C) DG Cho also said that it was regrettable that the 
press had mischaracterized President Roh's comments on BDA. 
According to most newspaper accounts, the President said that 
the BDA enforcement actions had doomed the September 19 Joint 
Statement.  Cho acknowledged that the President said that the 
Joint Statement had been "buried the moment it was born," but 
pointed out that the President went on to say that "spring 
will come" and the Joint Statement will serve as a foundation 
upon which the cold war structure on the Korean Peninsula 
could be dismantled and a multilateral security dialogue can 
be established.  President Roh also said that the Joint 
Statement provided an opportunity to resolve the North Korea 
nuclear issues, but North Korea delayed the whole process of 
implementation on the pretext of financial issues.  Pol M/C 
replied that it was not helpful to the U.S.-ROK joint efforts 
in the Six Party Talks if the President even appears to cast 
doubt on the USG's good faith intention to implement the 
Joint Statement.  These remarks were certainly not consistent 
with the recent meeting between the two Presidents in Hanoi, 
POL M/C said.  Cho insisted that President Roh was very 
satisfied by the USG's strong determination to fully 
implement the Joint Statement. 
 
ENGLISH TEXT OF ROH'S SPEECH 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Unofficial English translation of excerpts from Roh's 
remarks: 
 
There are a lot of things to talk about, but what I wanted to 
emphasize the most today is "principles." But the public now 
perceives the government as if it were a government without 
principles. It's a sad thing. But there's nothing we can do. 
If I say I'm sad and angry, that would be another problem. 
 
That's the way I am. Even long before I became a president, 
whenever I had chance to speak, I never forgot to say 
something about "trust." The society would be maintained if 
there was trust, even if it's not a full democracy, whereas 
it cannot be maintained without trust, even if it's a 
democratic society. So I used to say that I put the highest 
priority on trust as the most important social value. But 
it's embarrassing to see the reliability of policy constantly 
being an issue. 
 
It goes the same with consistency. It is related to trust. 
It's about life. The same is true for national consensus. So 
the principles that I emphasized for this government are 
causing criticisms now. I'll try to do better. Or maybe this 
would be a chance for me to look at things with 
cool-headedness. This is homework for me. I won't surrender. 
But there is no way to prove that. 
 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
The conditions, situations, and people's mindsets are all 
very different between North Korea and South Korea. As some 
would say simplistically, reciprocity is a principle that 
says, "you hit me and I'll hit you back." But the 
inter-Korean relationship is not that simple. 
 
Rather than tying things with the principle of reciprocity, 
we would have to judge on a case-by-case basis, considering 
whether certain thing is in line with what we pursue--peace 
and trust. I'm not talking about unilateral concessions, but 
trying to earn the trust in the longer term, and judging what 
would be more beneficial for both Koreas, until realizing a 
greater goal through dialogue. In this regard, please 
understand that the policy concept that stand opposite 
reciprocity is pragmatism. 
 
I did not practice my veto on the laws on investigating the 
illegal fund transmittal to North Korea. I have never 
expressed my opposing views either. Although this is a 
controversial issue, I know that the people want transparency 
in inter-Korean dialogue and exchanges. The universal trend 
of our society is a greater demand for transparency, even if 
it relates to "governing action." And I thought it is the 
right thing to accept the people's demand. 
 
In fact, it's not that there is absolutely no room for 
"supra-legal governing action" in inter-Korean relations. I 
think it is probable--but the Chief of State can take 
governing actions transcending laws only when the people 
accept that. If the people do not universally accept it, I 
thought it would be difficult. It was inevitable at that 
time. I don't know if it was right or wrong, but it was my 
choice. And couldn't this be another "principle"? 
 
There were also some minor incidents. Based on principle, I 
ordered to stop talks with North Korea when North Korea first 
stopped dialogue. Once they followed my order, but since the 
Ministry of Unification is a government agency trying to make 
things happen, there were some instances where I made orders 
but the Ministry of Unification said that the particular case 
was a little different--they would make a little different 
interpretation, and try not to cut the dialogue altogether. I 
did not hold them accountable for that, because I didn't 
think it was worth it. 
 
Still now a lot of aid to North Korea has come to a halt. 
This is about principle, but also about strategic choice. The 
current stoppage of aid to North Korea is not so much based 
on principles (such as humanitarian or reciprocity), as on 
strategic basis that this would be more advantageous. 
 
I agree with all other principles of simultaneous action and 
separation of government and private sector. I'll endeavor 
along that line. Committee member Chung Min just said that we 
need to convince the USG and Congress. Although the 
government hasn't expressly used the terms like 
"non-nuclear," but we are headed toward that direction. On 
this point, we may need to coin a good policy name or just 
use this term.  Let me think about it. 
 
And then there was a suggestion that we should pursue the 
broader agreement on dissolving the Cold War structure and 
establish a peace regime, hand in hand with resolving the 
North Korea nuclear issue. The September 19th Joint Statement 
mentions just that. It has a clause on negotiating a peace 
regime, and also the NE Asia multilateral security system. So 
the September 19th statement may seem useless, since it seems 
to be drifting apart right now, but it contains a whole new 
concept of NE Asia multilateral security system. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
The September 19th statement came when the ROK played the 
leading role in North Korea issue. After that, the U.S. 
backed down a little, or rather, stuck in the BDA issue. This 
is really intriguing for myself. While the September 19th 
statement was still being written in Beijing, the US Treasury 
Department had already frozen North Korea's BDA account a 
couple of days before. 
 
My thinking is that the U.S. State Department didn't know 
about it in Beijing and came all the way up to this point 
without being able to resolve the BDA issue. Or if we look at 
it from a negative perspective, the two issues may have been 
planned ahead and done this way on purpose. 
 
On the other hand, the Treasury and State Departments seem to 
differ on interpretation of principles concerning the issue. 
So there may be some room for political flexibility.  We're 
guessing that the Treasury would be inclined to go by the 
book, by the law, but still it's hard to know clearly. 
 
So that's how the September 19th statement was buried as soon 
as it was born, but spring will come, and it will bud, and be 
a stepping stone for us to dissolve the Cold War structure 
and consolidate peace on the Peninsula, and pursue a NE Asia 
multilateral security system, or a peace regime. We will be 
headed in that direction. 
 
North Korea Policies 
-------------------- 
 
You have talked about consistency and consensus, and I'll 
make efforts toward that. There are a lot of talks about 
forming a consultative body on North Korea policy, comprising 
the so-called senior leaders from all backgrounds. But the 
hardest part about bringing them together is that they cannot 
communicate with each other. They use different language. We 
experienced colonial rule, excessive ideological 
confrontation, a war, and military dictatorship.  All along 
the process, we tend not to tolerate or recognize each other. 
So we don't use the same language. We have different 
perceptions. So the cause is good, but it has not been 
realized. 
 
So I tried to realize it by appointing Goh Kun as my 
government's first PM. I hoped he would be a bridge between 
the conservatives and myself. But I ended up ostracizing 
myself and my aides in this government. The person in the 
middle did not converge those on the extremes but rather 
became isolated. As a result, I consider this personnel 
appointment a failure. 
 
I also tried to emulate the U.S. president Lincoln's 
personnel affairs policy by engaging political rivals when I 
appointed Kim Geun-tae and Chung Dong-young as Cabinet 
ministers. But the difference between Lincoln and myself was 
that he was praised for his actions, but I was cursed for 
that. It's hard to imitate Lincoln--not much fun. 
 
So this is the National Unification Advisory Council. This is 
an issue concerning unification, foreign affairs, and 
national security policy. From a broader perspective, this is 
included in, or closely related to, the area of national 
security. Or, maybe this is the other side of the coin. Why 
do we have to unify our nation? To live better? To live a 
more humane life? But the more essential goal would be to 
secure peace. This is the first and foremost issue, and then, 
through that, it would be good if we could become more 
prosperous. 
 
It would be a more humane life to become integrated with 
those who are our blood, who use the same language, and who 
share the same culture. To that end, we should unify. And for 
that purpose, peace is the essential concept for security. 
 
What is security, then? Both winning in a war and peace are 
the purposes of security. But in its unique term, security 
would mean peace, or national activity aimed at peace. 
Preventing war, rather than winning a war. So it would be 
good to clarify the purpose of our security, which is peace, 
rather than winning a war. 
 
Then how can we do it? Through dialogue. There are cases 
where confrontational atmosphere is constantly created for 
the purpose of security. In other words, trying to solidify 
security through being on alert against the opponent. And 
hostile emotions are involved here. Distrust as well. If 
security were to prevent war, it would be sufficient to have 
capability to fully defeat the enemy upon its attack, without 
being hurt, or with just a minor injury. This would 
constitute a perfect security readiness. 
 
And then make the enemy acknowledge that it cannot defeat us 
through attack. Cannot defeat, therefore cannot occupy and 
cannot dominate. Let's think about this stage. What does it 
all mean if you win but cannot occupy? What is the war for, 
if you occupy but cannot dominate? So if there were no 
possibility, anyone with common sense would not start a war 
in the first place. So making ourselves undefeatable would 
deter the enemy from waging a war. How far should we go in 
comparison of power, where should we put our goal? The enemy 
will not do an outrageous thing--it will assess its 
adversary. 
 
But we should find out if our adversary is in its right mind, 
or completely out of his mind, or an outright fool. So this 
is the basic premise. So when you are at a presidential 
campaign debate, when panels ask you what you thought about 
Kim Jong-il, if you thought he was a reasonable person, if 
you answer "yes," you come under fire. But "no" would not be 
an easy answer, either. So this is a unique political culture 
of Korea where you get questioned on those hard-to-answer 
issues. But I would say he would have a judgment of his own, 
from a certain aspect, fit for a communist regime, or Juche 
ideology. In other words, he wouldn't do anything that would 
kill himself. 
 
We may imagine that a person may do whatever is necessary if 
completely cornered. But we haven't quite reached a consensus 
on whether he is completely out of his mind to a point where 
he would risk actions that would eventually kill him, or he 
is just an abnormal person. So the Korean society cannot even 
concur on that point. Some say Kim Jong-il must at least be 
in his right mind, but some say he is completely out of his 
mind. 
 
And if you say, "he may be okay," then you'd be bashed for 
that. So that is how the ROK works. We monitor our safety 
based on such criteria. When we say we prevent war to a 
certain extent, there should be no injury when a war does 
occur. But when there is a war, you get many injuries even if 
you win. There are a lot of losses, so you must prevent it 
from happening. And the issue of setting criteria of our 
deterrence--should we presume Kim Jong-il is a normal person 
or not--has been the cause for a serious, serious fight 
within the ROK. 
 
What we see in newspapers these days--albeit cartoon-like 
talks--are all based on this controversy. In other words, 
anyone in his right mind would not provoke the ROK since it's 
tantamount to suicide, and so I think we just need 
appropriate management of security. But people who don't 
agree seem to want to verify my ideology. When I nominate a 
Cabinet minister, he is asked in the NA hearing about whether 
the Korean War was an invasion by North Korea or South Korea. 
They're thinking that I would appoint a person who doesn't 
even know whether the Korean war was an invasion by South or 
North as a Cabinet minister. It's not fair. I am sane. 
 
So this is what makes it difficult. Everything must be 
resolved through dialogue, not through war or power. And the 
big premise for dialogue is the recognition of the other, 
which is the basic principle of a democracy. You should be 
open to the possibility that his opinion may be right. Isn't 
this what "relativism" is all about? 
 
Tolerance is the premise for dialogue. We try to resolve 
inter-Korean issues through dialogue, and we try to put 
dialogue before war or use of force.  And this is what 
security through dialogue is all about. 
 
So we're trying to have dialogue with North Korea, but we 
have different perceptions. And we try to have dialogue 
amongst ourselves, we have different perceptions about 
values. There was a case in our history where 8,000 people 
were killed in 1866 on grounds for having believed in 
Catholicism, or engaged in Western studies. So while we 
should adopt the good parts of our ancestors, we must be 
aware of the fact that there were also dangerous elements in 
our traditional ways of thinking. We should reflect on our 
culture of "killing" anyone who stands on the opposite side. 
So we should overcome the culture of completely eliminating 
anything different from oneself. 
 
Security 
-------- 
 
And I would like to see our security front quieter. Security 
can be maintained quietly, but the people tend to be relieved 
only when the government makes a great deal out of security. 
North Korea launched missiles--from northern Gangwon province 
to off the coast of North Hamgyeong province. It was clear 
the missile weren't coming toward South Korea. Wasn't 
everyone aware of that? 
 
Political, security situation is something that gradually 
changes, not something that happens overnight. It wasn't 
anything like a war would break out that very day. Still, 
should the government have announced that North Korea 
launched missile, and so the people should buy up instant 
noodle packages and put on their gas masks? Should the 
government have announced a state of emergency even before 
dawn? 
 
It was reported in the morning. My aides called for an 
emergency security meeting, but I said let's not do it, 
there's no reason to startle the people. 
 
So we decided to convene at 11 o'clock as a Cabinet 
ministerial meeting. There would have been no difference in 
dealing with the situation whether if we did it as a cabinet 
meeting or security meeting, whether a 5 o'clock meeting or 
an 11 o'clock meeting. No difference in the result, and no 
difference in making decisions. 
 
But I was so badly bashed for not having been noisier, not 
having terrified the citizens. Let's not do that. Let's be 
quiet. The ROK has sufficient national and military 
capability to safeguard the security even without all the 
noise. 
 
I've raised the defense budget. Many of my supporters said I 
should cut defense budget and use it for welfare, but I 
raised defense budget. That was because I thought military 
capability against North Korea is not the whole story. 
Rather, having a strong defense capability on all fronts was 
important, lest foreign military forces should come play war 
on our soil--that was the case when Korea fell victim of the 
Japanese invasion, Sino-Japanese war, and the Russo-Japanese 
war during the power vacuum on the peninsula due to a weak 
military power. 
 
So until the complex, potentially hostile relationship with 
China, Japan and the U.S. is turned into a multilateral 
security regime or a community in NE Asia, the ROK must be 
equipped with reciprocal defense capability. 
 
So that is why I couldn't cut down on defense budget. But 
there is no reason, no need to make people feel insecure 
about our North Korea policy. Our security is good even 
without doing so. But the poll results say I am doing poorly 
in security--so I think politics are very difficult. Whenever 
I try to stick to my beliefs, I get bashed. But still, I 
cannot stop. I must change what must be changed, even if that 
means the public disapproves me, I must do the right thing. 
Wasn't this the reason that the presidency cannot be 
extended? 
 
U.S.-ROK Alliance 
----------------- 
 
Why did I dispatch troops to Iraq? Why is the relationship 
with the U.S. so bad? I don't think it's bad, but people ask 
me that way. At first when I was elected president, there 
were a lot of talks of an armed attack on North Korea, 
concerning North Korea nuclear issue, mostly in newspapers of 
the US and Korea, and that caused the people a lot of 
insecure feelings. So that's why I said attacking North Korea 
is a non-starter. 
 
Then the people who'd led our national security said that 
would irritate the U.S., that Roh would disrupt our 
relationship with the U.S. But I said that a war with North 
Korea is a non-starter anyhow. 
 
That was because, the most important criteria for judging 
whether a nation or an individual has a friend would be to 
see if it has someone who borrows or invests money. So the 
first thing all foreign investors asked when I became 
President was: 1) whether there would be a war; 2) whether 
North Korea would collapse; and 3) whether the ROK would be 
in good terms with the U.S. 
 
So the things I needed to say then was that there's going to 
be no war, and that we're in good terms with U.S. And the 
clearest proof of that would be the troop dispatch to Iraq. 
That's not simply a relationship issue between Roh and the 
U.S., but a barometer of whether our alliance was continuing 
to function. Some said we need to send 10,000 troops. Some 
said 5,000. Some said we must send combatant forces. But some 
opposed. And still others raised doubts about the cause of 
the war itself. So we eventually decided to send 3,000 
non-combatant troops--wasn't this a good deal? 
 
Speaking about "deal," it would be the most effective deal to 
realize the goal of earning international confidence in the 
stability of the US-ROK alliance with the least cost. 
 
The U.S. raised the issue of relocating its 2nd division to 
the rear front. Some Koreans said no, because they were 
afraid of eliminating the tripwire. But we decided to 
relocate. Now there are a lot of controversies. Some say the 
security is destabilized, now that the 2nd division is at the 
rear, North Korea may invade, because the U.S. would not 
automatically intervene anymore. Others said if the U.S. 
attacked North Korea, then North Korea would immediately 
retaliate to the 2nd division in the front lines. Now that 
the 2nd division is relocated, the US might be preparing for 
attack on North Korea. Those were anti-Americans. But I 
thought it should be relocated. It's based on principles. 
 
How great are the ROK forces' defense capability? Let me be 
frank. It outstripped that of North Korea in 1985 at the 
latest--now it's been 20 years since then. And we've been 
putting in over ten times the amount of North Korea's defense 
budget over those years. I don't think the money was for 
nothing. Many former defense ministers raise concerns about 
our defense power, but haven't they been negligent if our 
defense capability was still weaker than that of North Korea, 
with all that money? 
 
So to be candid, comparing our defense capability, the USFK 
2nd division can be relocated to the rear line. I would have 
much preferred a quieter situation by leaving them as they 
were, but the reason I decided to relocate was that we needed 
to do away with this psychological reliance on the U.S. The 
most important thing in national defense is the will and 
confidence of the people that they're keeping their own 
country by themselves. It's not like something guaranteed by 
clinging to the U.S. It's not something the people of a 
self-reliant nation should be doing. 
 
I think the word "tripwire" itself is shameful. Why should we 
be using another country's forces for our national security 
purposes? If sacrifice is inevitable, then we have to shed 
our blood. Only then can the President of this nation talk on 
a more equal footing with the U.S. President, when the U.S. 
tries to use the USFK as leverage in whatever talks we have 
on economy or any other area. But now when the U.S. ever 
hints at withdrawing its troops, just about every Korean goes 
faint. How can I talk equally with my U.S. counterpart? 
 
Of course we cannot do a perfectly equal diplomacy with the 
U.S. It may be senseless to think so, since the U.S. is a 
superpower. We should respect and treat the U.S. befitting 
its power and global influence. We cannot go against the 
world order led by the U.S. But at least we should save our 
face as a self-reliant, independent nation. Can't we at least 
from time to time push forward with some nerve? 
 
But in a country where the people panic when they talk about 
relocating the 2nd division of USFK, how can the President or 
Foreign Minister talk with U.S. government officials on equal 
footing? We should resolve this psychological reliance. So 
that's why I relocated. And when talks about reducing USFK 
came out. I said yes. They said let's keep it closed-door. I 
said let's leave it open. Then they said let's postpone it. 
So we talked about troop cuts a year later. But eventually 
talks about troop cuts came out from the U.S. side. We asked 
why did you raise this when you suggested postponing the 
talks. Then they said we were the ones who asked for 
postponement. So there's a lot of arguing, but I haven't 
investigated this. Anyway, I think some troop cuts won't 
hurt. 
 
Why must we move the Yongsan base? It's an expensive 
property. It would cost approximately 5.5 trillion won for 
base relocation. Although there may be some pluses and 
minuses, it would be much more expensive when you try to buy 
that real estate with money. If it were not the USFK and a 
property of an individual, then the government would make 
assessment and pay the money and buy the land. So why is USFK 
located there, blocking the subway route, roads, and any 
cultural or commercial facilities for Korean citizens? Why 
can't we do it? Because we had no money. Former presidents 
Kim Young-sam and Noh Tae-woo reached an agreement, but the 
government didn't have the money. But now that the economic 
crisis is gone, and we can pay the money over a 10-year term, 
now we should purchase the land. 
 
That makes the situation look simple, but it makes such a 
noise in Pyongtaek, and people will ask why is the Roh 
government so noisy. But we should be doing what needs to be 
done. 
 
It is true that this (USFK base) undermines our symbol of a 
self-reliant nation. Even if we're allies, it hurts to have 
foreign forces at the center of our capital city, 
particularly on the spot where the forces from Qing dynasty 
had been stationed in the past. Don't you think the 
"independence gate" that our ancestors constructed is 
historically symbolic? The base relocation must also be seen 
from the same perspective. Humans are historical animals. 
Yongsan base and OPCON transfer--the cause is for 
self-reliance. 
 
The same thing. Don't we have the capability to conduct 
operational control? What have the ROK forces done so far? 
They all served in the military, I served in the military, 
trained in the reserved force, paid taxes. But those on the 
higher ranks--what did they do? Did they just enjoy the title 
of Defense Minister and JCS Chairman, without even having 
their own military get ready for their own OPCON? Is that why 
they scramble for issuing statements opposing OPCON transfer? 
Isn't that a kind of delinquency? Shame on them. 
 
I believe the ROK forces will do fine. Korea's strong in its 
economy, culture, film industry, cell phones, automobiles, 
shipbuilding, everything. Why not OPCON? 
 
We should always maintain readiness for a contingency 
situation, concerning North Korea and concerning China. China 
will do the same. And when we have our own OPCON, it will 
make difference in our dealing with North Korea and China 
diplomatically, concerning NE Asia security issues. 
 
It doesn't make sense for a country without its own OPCON to 
discuss anything--whether to bomb civilian facilities, for 
instance--with China or North Korea.  This is something very 
important in terms of diplomatic interest. 
 
I don't think those opponents to OPCON transfer are ignorant 
of this important aspect. Then again, it puzzles me to think 
why they would have stayed mum on OPCON so far, if they 
already knew all this. It's like opposing whatever Roh does 
would be justice.  They're simply trying to shake me. They 
consider me to have suddenly appeared on stage out of 
nowhere. That's the way it is. 
 
Whether we agree to OPCON or not, this is a diplomatic issue. 
In our relationship with China, we'll be able to say to China 
that: we'll be cautious on any hostile action in NE Asia, 
even when there is the USFK; we've agreed so on OPCON; 
nothing that the Korean public opposes will not happen, and 
things that the Korean public agree would take place. Isn't 
this the best? Even if we set everything now, you never know 
what will happen in the future. So the best thing at this 
point would be to take action on whatever the Korean public 
agrees to, and not to do whatever the public opposes. 
 
How can we set everything now? I talked with President Bush 
on this issue a lot. Everything's taken care of. There is 
this philosophy underlying the National Defense Reform. It 
was talked about during the Noh Tae-woo, Kim Young-sam, and 
Kim Dae-jung administrations, but the bill has just now 
passed the national Assembly. But implementation is not 
taking place. Who would like a reform? It's actually 
self-restructuring, isn't it? The President can't do it 
alone.  Eventually, the Ministry of national Defense, the 
military, shaped the reform plan and announced it to the 
public. 
 
Defense Reform 2020--it doesn't need more money, in 
particular. The troops are cut to 500,000--because it needs 
to be cut and can be cut. Some raise the issue of cutting 
personnel and expanding weaponry. Of course if we are to 
fight only with North Korea, it'll be good to have more 
troops, since there may be a lot of ground battles. But if we 
think of our security from a more diverse perspective, the 
number of troops wouldn't do it. Rather, we should cut budget 
on feeding, clothing, housing people, and rather invest in 
developing an advanced, well-performing weapons. 
 
Low birth rates are an issue these days. Rather than keeping 
them several years in the military, we should let them work, 
get married, and have kids early on. 
 
We need to change the whole system of our society into one 
that encourages getting married early and getting employed 
early. Otherwise, the economy would stall. We're now on the 
planning stage for the policy shift. 
 
What do you think are the things in the military that became 
worse since I became President? Reporters don't have much to 
write about these days concerning the military, because there 
is nothing going poorly--whether it's a personnel 
appointment, or a 1.4 trillion won-worth procurement project 
where we selected the contracting party, without any rumors 
about corruption or shady transactions. 
 
There were a lot of suicide incidents, shooting accidents. We 
should work on that expeditiously. But culture is not 
something that is fixed overnight. 
 
Currently, dramatic changes are happening on the practices 
concerning personnel, procurement, and budget transparency. 
The army life is fast changing too. We're currently doing 
construction or repair works on their barracks through 
private sector investment. And we are also trying to work on 
helping retired officers get jobs, in order to restructure 
the military. 
 
So we're now doing our best. But we postponed appointing a 
civilian as a Defense Minister, since it would be too much at 
this time. 
 
I think my pace of social reform is also too fast for some. 
People tell me they're dizzy because of that. So I settled 
with postponing the civilianization of the Ministry of 
National Defense--which means the appointment of a civilian 
as Defense Minister. 
 
Since we're at a critical point to reform the military, I 
thought it would be good for the President to trust the 
military itself and let them conduct their reform on their 
own. That is why I decided to postpone civilianization of the 
Ministry of National Defense and put military reform first. 
 
I'm positive it'll go well. Security will go well. 
 
There are a lot of talks about Roh doing good and bad, but 
please help me by telling others that Roh seems to be doing 
at least what he needs to do as a President, focused on doing 
the best thing for the nation based on principles, and now 
that we've elected him already, let's give him a chance to 
take care of defense, foreign affairs, security, and 
unification. Let him take care of it...he's not an outright 
fool. He knows what to take care of and what to calculate. 
Let him do his work...Please. 
VERSHBOW
</file>