^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3970  |  2006-11-17 02:33  |  비밀(2급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PARM PREL MNUC MARR JA KS KN CH IR }}  |
====== 제 목: 조셉 차관 박인국 대사와 확산방지구상 논의 ======
비밀 SEOUL 003970 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
국무부는 군비통제국제안보담당: 국제안보비핵산국 수석 부차관보 멕너니에게 전달((DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO T: ISN PDAS MCNERNEY ))

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 11/16/2016 
태그: PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), MNUC(([Military Nuclear Applications])), MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), JA(([Japan; Okinawa; Ryukyu Islands])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)])), CH(([China (Mainland)])), IR(([Iran] ))
제 목: 조셉 차관 박인국 대사와 확산방지구상 논의
분류자: 공관차석 빌 스탠턴((DCM BILL STANTON.)) 근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/15 06:39//
===== 요약 =====

1. (비밀) 조셉 차관과 대표단은 11월 7일 박인국 외교정책실장과 함께한 회동에서 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호 구현과 다른 핵심 반확산 구상을 논의하였다. 박 실장과 함께한 오찬 겸 실무 회동에서 조셉 차관과 대표단은 유엔안보리 1718호 구현과 남한의 PSI 전면 참여, 그리고 전 세계 비확산 사찰 구조 강화를 위한 한국의 지원 등에 대해 긴밀한 협력을 촉구하였다. 남한정부는 대체로 미국의 조치를 지지하며 결의안 1718호를 충실히 이행할 의사를 내비치며, 한국 정부는 11월 13일쯤에 안보리에 제출할 보고서를 만들기 위해 유관 기관 합동 대책반을 꾸렸다고 했다.

2. (비밀) 자세한 내용에 대해 압박하자, 한국은 대책에 무엇을 포함할지 아직 고려 중이며, 평양과의 충돌로 비화할 우려로 인해 국내 정치의 제약이 있다고 박인국은 말하였다. 그는 한국은 대량살상무기 확산방지구상에(이하 PSI) 참여하는 방향으로 가고 있다고 말했지만, 한국 수역 안에서 북한 선박의 차단으로 정전협정이 절단 날까 걱정하였다. 한국은 컨테이너안전협정에는 어떤 문제도 없다면서도, 국제 컨테이너 검색 네트워크 프로그램의 범위를 두고 일부 우려가 있다는 뜻을 내비쳤다. 그렇긴 하지만 국제 컨테이너 검색 네트워크 기술팀의 예고된 11월 13일 부산 방문을 환영하였다. 그는 한국정부는 비무장지대 수송 회랑을((번역 주:'동·서부지대 남북관리구역'이 공식용어이다.))  통해서 북한을 출입하는 북한 화물 감시의 개선된 방안을 고려하고 있다고 하면서, 남북 해운합의서 상의 제약에 관해 브리핑하였다. 한국 정부가 그러한 개선 문제의 여러 사안을 “연구”하고 있다고 확인해주면서, 양측이 유엔안보리 보고의 준비를 마친 이후에 유엔안보리 1718호 구현과 관련해 한미 양국이 재차 협의하기로 합의하였다. 요약 끝.

===== 조셉 차관의 비확산 서울 회동 =====

3. (비밀) 2006년 11월 7일 로버트 조셉 군비통제안보담당 국무차관은 박인국 외교정책실장과 함께한 회동에서 유엔안보리 1718호와 PSI, 그리고 다른 반확산 구상을 논의하였다. 박 실장은 전번 회의 이후에 북한의 핵실험에 대한 대응으로 해당 이슈에 대한 “숙제”를 하고 지냈다고 조셉 차관에게 말하였다. 박인국은 정부 안에 본인과 이관세 통일부 정책홍보본부장이 공동 의장을 맡은 부처 합동 대책반을 꾸렸다고 설명하였다. 당해 대책반은 전날을 비롯해 수차례 회동을 해서 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호에 따라 구현해야 할 조치와 관한 한국의 유엔안보리 보고의 초안을 짜고 있다.

4. (비밀) 조셉 차관은 북한의 10월 9일 핵실험 이후 국무장관의 베이징 회동은 고무적이었다며, 중국이 유엔안보리 1718호의 전면 구현을 다짐하고 있는 듯 보인다고 박 실장에게 알렸다. 일본과 호주의 비확산 당국자와 함께한 방금 치른 도쿄 3자 논의가 생산적이었다고 그는 말하였다. 조셉 차관은 미국 정부가 유엔안보리 1718호를 뒷받침하기 위해 단행한 여러 조치를 설명하였다. 미국정부는 1718호, PSI, 전 세계 반확산 사찰 구조 강화 등에 관하여 한국 정부와의 긴밀한 협력에 대한 가치를 높게 평가한다고 강조하면서, 이러한 중요한 반확산 조치의 지원과 관련 한국의 현재 생각과 계획된 여러 조치를 설명해 달라고 박인국에게 요청하였다.

===== 유엔안보리 결의안 구현 =====

5. (비밀) “광의적으로 보면, 미국의 행보는 올바른 방향으로 가고 있다고 나는 생각한다”고 박인국은 말하면서도 재빨리 덧붙이길 1718호 제재위원회는 제재 대상 북한 인사, 법인, 상품에 대한 결정을 개별 국가에 맡겨 둔 것으로 그는 이해한다고 했다. 그는 우리가 바랐던 대북 수출 금지 물품에 대한 미국의 목록에 대해 조셉 차관에게 감사하면서, “유익한” 정보라고 칭하였지만, 한국은 자체적인 목록을 개발하고 있음을 분명히 하면서, 미국 정부와 공유할 것을 약속하였다. 박인국은 목록이 “짧을수록 더 좋다”고 말하였는데, 반면 조셉 차관은 단지 문서 상으로 유엔 결의안을 추인하지 말고, 결의안의 정신을 담아내는 여지를 두고, 양국의 개별적인 목록 사이 면밀한 호환을 담보하는 모든 노력을 기울이라고 한국 당국자들에게 장려하였다. 사찰 구조의 강화

===== 사찰 구조의 강화 =====

6. (비밀) 미국 대표단 구성원인 국제안보비확산국 수석 부차관보인 패트리샤 멕너니는 역내 사찰 구조의 강화를 통한 북한 화물의 정밀 조사를 확대할 필요성에 대해 박 실장과 그의 동료에게 브리핑하였다. 그녀는 미국 정부는 한국 항만과 한국 수역 안에서 사찰을 강화하고 확대하길 바란다고 설명하였다. 한편으로 유엔안보리 1718호 이행에 이바지하는 가운데 한국의 PSI 참여는 중요한 반확산 도구가 될 수 있다고 미국 정부는 역시 생각하고 있다. 박 실장은 의심되는 북한 선박에 대한 승선이 필요하다면 어느 곳에서 벌어질지 물었다: “공해 상에서?” 수석 부차관보 멕너니는 그 경우는 마지막 수단으로만 벌어질 거라고 설명하였다. 바람직한 방법의 사례로는 다음 기항지에 해당 선박이 다다를 때 PSI 회원국이 해당 선박을 조사하도록 요구하도록 할 수 있다고 그녀는 지적하였다. 일반 대중의 오해와는 정반대라고 하면서, PSI 회원국은 자국의 법적 권한의 범주 안에서 작업하며, 그들이 국내 법적 권한의 최대치를 발휘할 장소에서 조치를 단행 하는 게 바람직하다고 멕너니는 강조하였다. 조셉 차관은 “일부 PSI 요소들이 유엔안보리 1718호를 넘어서는 것으로 보인다”는 박 실장의 주장을 일축하면서 PSI 회원국이 단행할 조치는 국제법과 합치하고, 전적으로 자발적인 행위라고 했다.

7. (비밀) 한국의 PSI 연습 참관이 PSI 차단 원칙을 승인하는 데 한국의 생각에 어떻게 영향을 미쳤는지 묻자, 박인국은 한국 정부 내에서 현재 검토 중이라고 대답하였다. 더 압박을 가하자, 한국은 PSI가 “도움이 된다”고 보고 있고, “참가하는 쪽으로 가고 있다”며 핵심 국내 정치 사안인 북한이 어떻게 반응할지에 관한 민감성으로 말미암아 한국 지도자들은 공개적인 PSI 전면 승인을 못 하고 있다. 남한에서는 북한이 주요 국내 정치 쟁점이기 때문에, 한국의 관료들은 “잠잠해지길 기다려야" 한다고 박인국은 말하였다. 그는 문제를 복잡하게 만드는 점은 한국 사회 안에서 PSI에 대한 국민의 심각한 오해가 있다는 사실이라고 덧붙이면서, 한반도의 많은 사람들의 생각에는 차단이 봉쇄나 마찬가지로 여기면서, PSI 체제 하에서 단행될 조치로 정전 협정이 절단 날까 걱정이 늘고 있다고 그는 설명하였다.

===== 핵 물질의 확산 저지 =====

8. (비밀) 대표단 일원인 윌리엄 토비 에너지국 비확산 부서장은 핵물질의 탐지와 안전, 그리고 처분을 위한 미국의 미화 17억 달러 노력에 대해 한국 대표단에 브리핑하였다. 토비는 우리의 대표적인 임무는 다양한 탐지 메커니즘의 사용 확대를 비롯해 여러 조치의 연계를 통한 확산 억제라고 설명하였다. 특히 미국정부는 아래와 같은 구상을 확대하길 원한다고 토비는 말하였다:
  * 거대 항만대책
  * 방벽 제 2 선
  * 컨테이너안전협정
  * 항공기 검사
  * 우발적인 검사((번역 주: ‘편의주의적 검사’로 번역할 수도))
  * 물품식별연수
미합중국은 북한이 한국을 통해서 (핵)확산하지는 않을 것으로 보지만, 우리는 확산을 미연에 억제하기 위한 한국의 지원을 환영한다고 토비는 결론 졌다.

9. (비밀) 토비 씨의 발표에 대해 응대하길, 컨테이너안전협정은 무작위 서류 검사만을 수반하지만, 국제 컨테이너 검색네트워크에 한국이 참여하는 게 훨씬 더 어려운 이유는 한국 정부가 대략 16,000 선적 컨테이너를 확인해야 하기 때문이다. 그럼에도 박인국은 국제 컨테이너 검색네트워크의 기술팀의 다가올 11월 13월 서울 방문을 환영한다며 자신이 직원들에게 그들과 긴밀히 협력해서 모든 현안을 처리할 것을 촉구하겠다고 덧붙였다.

===== 남북 간 화물 수송에 대한 향상된 검사 =====

10. (비밀) 북한 관련 현안 논의에 재차 초점을 맞추면서, 북한의 전체 물동량이 상대적으로 적은 규모라 지금까지는 아주 쉽게 검사했다고 조셉 차관은 지적하였다. 스탠튼 공관 차석은 동·서부지대 남북관리구역을 따라 현재 시행되고 있는 형식적인 검사에 대해 우려를 제기하였다. 스탠튼은 유엔안보리 1718호에 비추어 한국이 북한 물자 반·출입에 대한 자체적인 감시 강화를 고려하고 있는지를 물었다. 박 실장은 한국 정부가 그 문제에 대해 생각하고 있으며, 새로운 제한 조치가 한국의 11월 13일 유엔안보리 보고에 포함될 공산이 크다고 덧붙였다. 현재 남북 검열 체계는 “형편없는 시스템”이라고 칭하면서, 북한이나 남한으로 향하는 차량은 각기 출입국지역을 통과한 이후에 공동 검열 지역에 들어서게 된다고 박인국은 설명하였다. 박인국은 남북 간 차량 통행을 하도록 공동 검열 지역의 안팎으로 연결된 출입문은 업무시간 동안 30분마다 개방되고 차단된다고 말하였다.

11. (비밀) 북한으로 반입되는 사치품에 대한 질문을 받자, 박인국은 한국 통일부는 금지 품목에 대한 자체적인 “완전 목록”을 만드는 과정에 있다고 조셉 차관에게 말하였다. 국가안전보장회의 반확산전략 국장 데이비드 스티븐스는 양국 간의 문제가 되지 않도록 반입금지 목록에 대해 미합중국과 한국이 협력할 필요에 대해 주의를 당부하였다. 박 실장은 동의하면서도, 북한에 있는 남한 근로자가 섭취 목적으로 현재 북한으로 보내지는 위스키에 대해 어떤 일이 생길지, “그게 아니면 북한에서 자발적으로 근무하지 않을 사람들이다.”라며 농을 섞어 조바심쳤다.

===== 남북 해운합의서 =====

12. (비밀) 후속 실무 오찬 중에, 박 실장은 2005년 8월 1일 발효된 남북 해운합의서의 내용에 대해 미국 대표단에 브리핑하였다. 동 합의서에서 한국 수역에서 대량살상무기를 운반하는 북한 선박을 한국이 차단하도록 하는지 묻자, 박인국은 허용하지 않으며, 해운합의서의 문안은 양측의 요청과 승인에 의한 허가를 특정하고 있기 때문이다. 그러나 유엔안보리 1718호에 비추어, 한국은 해운합의서 운용을 어떻게 할지 현재 재고 중이라고 덧붙였다. 그는 올해까지 북한 선박 70척이 제주와 한반도 남단 사이에 수역을 통과하도록 허가한 바 있다고 말했고, 북한의 동부와 서부 항만을 북한 선장이 항해할 때 해상에서 4.5시간을 절약한다고 지적하였다. 박인국은 만일 북한이 대량살상무기를 비밀리에 한 해안에서 다른 해안으로 운반하길 원한다면, 단순히 육로로 이동하거나, 장거리 국제 경로를 이용할 수 있으므로 한국 수역을 통해 항해할 필요가 없다고 추가로 덧붙였다. 현재까지 한국은 북한의 해당 수역 통과 요청을 거부한 적이 없다. 북한은 한국 항구를 통해 옮겨 싣지 않았으며, 북한 선박은 과거 수년에 걸쳐 140차례 한국 수역을 통과했다고 덧붙였다. 그중 40차례는 북한 선박이 필요한 인도적 원조 물자를 선적하기 위해 한국 항구에 정박한 바 있다.

===== 지속적인 협의를 요하는 다른 현안들 =====

13. (비밀) 미합중국과 한국은 각기 자국의 유엔안보리 보고 준비를 마친 이후에 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호 구현에 대해 다시 협의해야 한다고 박 실장과 조셉 차관은 견해를 같이하였다. 박 실장은 글렌수정법에 근거한 자동 제재에 대해 질의했고 그 제재가 언제 발효되는지 물었다. 조셉 차관은 미국 대통령이 그 점에 관한 최종 결정을 내릴 거라고 대답하였다. 미국이 어떤 제제를 선택해 구현하든 간에 중요한 상징적인 메시지를 보내는 거라고 조셉은 덧붙였다.

14. (비밀) 한국은행의 북한과의 은행 거래에 대해 질문을 받자, 한국 정부는 예의 주시하고 있지만, 의심스러운 북한 법인의 거래 내용은 발견하지 못했다고 말하였다. 그럴 수 밖의 없는 이유는 “자신들이 낙인이 찍힐까 봐” 남한 은행은 북한과의 거래에 매우 조심스럽기 때문이라고 설명하였다. 자신은 북한이 2차 핵실험을 시행하지 않을 거라 믿는다며, “그 이유는 미국 정부가 사실상 북한을 핵보유국으로 이미 확인했기 때문이다”고 박인국은 말하였다. 제2차 핵실험은 한국의 대북 정책에 상당한 변화를 낳을 거라고 그는 주장하였다. 조셉 차관은 박 실장의 판단에 간접적으로 이의를 제기하길, 첫 실험으로 임계점을 넘어 버렸다고 했다.

15. (비밀) 박 실장은 북한의 장거리 미사일 능력에 대해 의구심을 표명하길, 중국이 대륙간 탄도 미사일 능력을 완성하기 전에 한 달에 15년 동안 한 번 꼴로 시험했다고 자신에게 말한 바 있다고 했다. 박인국은 중국과 북한 사이 1,400km 국경은 전 세계적 비확산 체제 안에서도 대단히 취약한 곳이라고 지적하면서, 유엔안보리 1718호 구현과 관련 미국의 중국과의 긴밀한 협조를 독려하였다. 6자 회담으로 돌아와, 박인국은 북한이 우선 핵물질을 포기하도록 설득하는 게 우리의 우선 과제이며 북한의 핵물질 확산 차단은 부차적이라고 주장하였다. 그런 논지를 거드는 차원에서 핵 문제는 (6자 회담을 통한) 수직적 처리가 필요할 뿐만 아니라 (비확산 노력을 통한) 수평적인 처리가 필요하다고 노 대통령이 언급했다는 우리 청와대 접선책이 전한 표현을 꺼내 들었다. 미국 정부는 6자 회담에 참가를 통해서 엄청난 외교적 노력을 기울였지만, 북한을 6자 회담으로 복귀하게 할 열쇠는 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호에서 기인하는 압력임은 분명하다고 조셉 차관은 지적하였다. 6자 회담이 성공하기 위해선 유일한 방안은 지속적인 압력밖에는 없다고 박인국에게 말하였다.

16. (비밀) 실무 오찬을 마무리하며 박 실장은 이란 핵 프로그램 문제를 잠시 제기하길, 이란의 궁극적 목표에 대한 조셉 차관의 견해를 구하면서, 핵 비확산 체제인 핵확산 방지 조약과 국제 원자력 기구가 핵무기 확산 중단이란 과제에 부응하지 못하는 것 같다며 우려를 표명하였다. 이란이 중동에서 선두 국가가 되기 위해 핵보유국 지위를 추구한다는 데 두 사람은 견해를 같이하였다. 만일 북한과 이란, 그리고 다른 국가들이 핵무기 개발의 길로 계속 나아간다면, 아마도 우리는 전 세계 핵 비확산 체재 세부 원칙의 변경을 고려할 필요가 있다고 박인국은 제안하였다.

17. (민감하지만 미분류) 조셉 차관은 이 전문을 승인하였다.
//버시바우//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3970|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단전재나 복제를 금지합니다.

===== 내부 고리와 바깥 고리 =====

<WRAP center round info>
  - [[06seoul3767|제 목: 한국, 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(PSI) 승인하지 않은 채 참여 확대하겠다고 제안]]  <wrap hi>숨은그림 찾기? 접선책(연락선, 접촉선?) 어떻게 부르든 스파이 찾기?</wrap>
  - [[http://news.hankooki.com/lpage/politics/200610/h2006102918125821040.htm|美, 北核 물질 탐지 시스템 부산항에 설치 요청]] //한국일보//
</WRAP>

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL3970.rtf>
S E C R E T SEOUL 003970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO T: ISN PDAS MCNERNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2016 
TAGS: PARM [Arms Controls and Disarmament], PREL [External Political Relations], MNUC [Military Nuclear Applications], MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], JA [Japan; Okinawa; Ryukyu Islands], KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)], CH [China (Mainland)], IR [Iran] 
SUBJECT: U/S JOSEPH NONPROLIFERATION TALKS WITH AMBASSADOR 
PARK IN-KOOK 
 
Classified By: DCM BILL STANTON.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S) Under Secretary Joseph and his delegation met with 
Deputy Foreign Minister for Policy Planning and International 
Organizations, Park In-kook, on November 7 to discuss 
implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 
(UNSCR) 1718, the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), 
and other key counterproliferation initiatives.  In a meeting 
and working lunch with DFM Park, U/S Joseph and his 
delegation urged close ROK cooperation on implementation of 
UNSCR 1718, South Korea's full participation in PSI, and ROK 
support for strengthening nonproliferation inspection 
architecture worldwide.  Park indicated that the South Korean 
government broadly supported U.S. actions and would fully 
implement 1718, noting that the ROKG had created an 
interagency task force that would produce a report to the 
UNSC by November 13. 
 
¶2.  (S) Pressed for specifics, Park said the ROK was still 
considering what to include in its response, and was 
constrained by domestic political concerns about sparking 
conflict with Pyongyang.  He said the ROK was moving toward 
participation in PSI, but worried that interdiction of DPRK 
vessels in Korean waters might rupture the Armistice 
Agreement.  Park indicated the ROK had no problem with the 
Container Security Initiative, but does have some concern 
over the scope of the International Container Scanning 
Network (ICSN) program.  He nonetheless welcomed the ICSN 
technical team's planned November 13 visit to Pusan.  He also 
indicated the ROKG was considering better ways to  monitor 
shipments moving to/from the North through the DMZ 
transportation corridors, and briefed on the limitations of 
the South-North Agreement on Maritime Transportation. 
Acknowledging that his government was still "studying" many 
of these issues, Park agreed the United States and ROK should 
consult again on implementation of UNSCR 1718 after each side 
had finished preparing its report to the UN Security Council. 
 END SUMMARY 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
U/S Joseph's Nonproliferation Meetings in Seoul 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  (S) Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and 
International Security Robert Joseph met with Ambassador Park 
In-kook, Deputy Foreign Minister for Policy Planning and 
International Organizations, on November 7, 2006 to discuss 
implementation of UNSCR 1718, PSI, and other 
counterproliferation initiatives.  DFM Park told U/S Joseph 
he had been doing his "homework" on these issues following 
their previous discussions and in response to North Korea's 
nuclear test.  The ROK had created an interagency task force, 
co-chaired by himself and Assistant Minister for Unification 
Lee Kwan-sei, Park explained.  The task force, which had met 
several times, including the previous day, was drafting the 
ROK's report to the UN Security Council on measures to 
implement UNSCR 1718, as required by the resolution. 
 
¶4.  (S) U/S Joseph informed DFM Park that the Secretary's 
meetings in Beijing that followed the October 9 DPRK nuclear 
test had been encouraging, and that China appeared committed 
to full implementation of UNSCR 1718. In addition, he said he 
had just held productive trilateral discussions in Tokyo with 
nonproliferation officials from Japan and Australia.  U/S 
Joseph described the steps the U.S. Government was taking in 
support of UNSCR 1718.  Stressing that the USG highly valued 
close cooperation with the ROK on 1718, PSI, and in 
strengthening counterproliferation inspection architecture 
worldwide, U/S Joseph asked Park to describe current ROK 
thinking, and planned actions, in support of these important 
counterproliferation measures. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
Implementation of UNSCR 1718 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S) "Broadly speaking, I think that U.S. actions are 
headed in the right direction," Park said, while quickly 
adding that as he understood it, the 1718 Sanctions Committee 
was leaving it up to individual countries to decide what 
North Korean individuals, entities and goods to sanction.  He 
thanked U/S Joseph for the USG listing of items we would like 
to see banned as exports to the North, calling it 
"instructive," but made it clear the ROK was developing its 
own list, which he promised to share with the USG.  Park said 
a list that was "shorter was better," while U/S Joseph 
encouraged the ROK officials in the room to embrace the 
spirit, and not merely follow the letter, of the resolution, 
and to make every effort to ensure close compatibility 
between our respective lists. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Enhancing Inspection Architecture 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (S) U.S. delegation member, ISN PDAS Patricia McNerney, 
briefed DFM Park and his colleagues on the need for increased 
scrutiny of North Korean shipping through enhancements to 
inspection architecture in the region.  She explained that 
the USG would like to see expanded and strengthened 
inspections at ROK ports and within its territorial waters, 
as well as keener scrutiny of overflights, road and rail 
transportation.  The USG also thinks that ROK participation 
in PSI could be an important counterproliferation tool, while 
also contributing to implementation of UNSCR 1718.  DFM Park 
asked where we anticipated any required boarding of suspect 
DPRK vessels would take place: "On the high seas?"  PDAS 
McNerney explained that would only occur as a last resort. 
An example of the preferred method, she noted, was to ask a 
PSI partner state to inspect the vessel when it reached its 
next port of call.  Noting public misperceptions to the 
contrary, she emphasized that PSI member states worked within 
their own national legal authorities, and preferred to take 
action where they had the maximum domestic legal authority to 
do so.  U/S Joseph rejected DFM Park's contention that "some 
elements of PSI appear to exceed UNSCR 1718," pointing out 
that actions taken by PSI member states were entirely 
voluntary and consistent with international law. 
 
¶7.  (S) Asked to describe how the ROK's observance of PSI 
exercises had affected its thinking about endorsing the 
statement of interdiction principles, Park replied that the 
matter was currently under study within the ROKG.  Pressed 
further, Park explained that while the ROK viewed PSI as 
"helpful" and was "moving toward participation," a key 
domestic political factor -- sensitivity regarding how North 
Korea would respond -- had so far kept ROK leaders from fully 
and openly endorsing PSI.  Because North Korea was a major 
domestic political issue for South Korea, ROK bureaucrats had 
to "wait until the dust settles," Park said.  Complicating 
the issue was the fact that there were serious public 
misunderstandings about PSI within Korean society, he added, 
explaining that in the minds of many on the Korean Peninsula, 
interdiction was tantamount to a blockade, giving rise to 
worries that actions taken under PSI would rupture the 
Armistice Agreement. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Deterring Proliferation of Nuclear Materials 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (S) Delegation member William Tobey, Deputy Administrator 
for Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation at the Department of 
Energy, briefed the ROK representatives on the $1.7 billion 
U.S. effort to detect, secure and dispose of nuclear 
materials.  Tobey describe our primary mission as deterrence 
 
through a combination of measures, including increased use of 
various detection mechanisms.  In particular, he said the USG 
wanted to expand the following initiatives: 
 
-- Megaports 
-- Second Line of Defense 
-- Container Security Initiative (CSI) 
-- Aircraft Inspections 
-- Opportunistic Inspections 
-- Commodity Identification Training 
 
While the United States was mindful the DPRK was unlikely to 
proliferate through the ROK, we welcomed ROK support to deter 
any proliferation from happening, Tobey concluded. 
 
¶9.  (S) Responding to Mr. Tobey's presentation, DFM Park 
pointed out that while CSI only entailed random document 
inspections, it would be far more difficult for the ROK to 
participate in the International Container Scanning Network 
(ICSN) because it would require the ROKG to check 
approximately 16,000 shipping containers a day.  Park 
nonetheless said he welcomed the upcoming November 13 visit 
to Seoul by the ICSN technical team, adding that he would 
urge his staff to work closely with them to address all 
concerns. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Better Monitoring of N-S Shipments 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (S) Refocusing the discussion on concerns about North 
Korea, U/S Joseph pointed out that the overall amount of DPRK 
shipping was relatively small, and thus far more easily 
monitored.  DCM Stanton raised concerns over the reported 
cursory inspections currently taking place along the east and 
west transportation corridors between North and South Korea. 
He asked whether, in light of UNSCR 1718, the ROK was 
considering strengthening its monitoring of goods flowing to 
and from the North.  DFM Park replied that the ROKG was 
giving the matter some thought, adding that new restrictive 
measures would likely be included in the ROKG's November 13 
report to the UN Security Council.  Calling the current N-S 
inspection regime a "terrible system," Park explained that 
vehicles heading either North or South entered a joint 
inspection area, after passing through their respective 
Customs, Immigration and Quarantine (CIQ) areas.  He said the 
gates leading into and out of the joint inspection area 
opened and closed every 30 minutes during regular work hours 
to allow the vehicles to pass between the North and South 
Korea. 
 
¶11.  (S) Asked about luxury goods going to the North, Park 
told U/S Joseph that the ROK Ministry of Unification was in 
the process of making its own "exhaustive list" of items to 
be banned.  NSC Director for Counterproliferation Strategy 
David Stephens cautioned on the need for the United States 
and ROK to work together on the list to prevent it from 
becoming a bilateral issue between our two countries.  DFM 
Park agreed, but jokingly fretted about what would happen to 
whisky currently being sent to the North for consumption by 
South Korean workers there "who otherwise would not volunteer 
to work in the DPRK." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
South-North Agreement on Maritime Transportation 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶12. (S) During a follow-on working lunch, DFM Park briefed 
the delegation on the content of the South-North Agreement on 
Maritime Transportation that came into force on August 1, 
2005.  Asked if the agreement allowed the ROK to interdict a 
North Korean vessel carrying WMD in ROK territorial waters, 
Park replied that it did not, since the language in the 
agreement specified that permission had to be asked and 
granted by either side.  He added, however, that in light of 
 
UNSCR 1718, the ROK was now re-thinking how it would choose 
to exercise the agreement.  He said 70 DPRK vessels had been 
granted permission so far this year to transit the waters 
between Cheju Island and the southern tip of the Korean 
Peninsula, pointing out that this saved the DPRK captains 4.5 
hours at sea when navigating between eastern and western DPRK 
ports.  Park further pointed out that if the DPRK wanted to 
move WMD clandestinely from one of its coasts to the other, 
it could simply move it overland or take a longer 
international route and therefore did not need to sail it 
through ROK territorial waters.  To date, the ROK had never 
denied a DPRK vessels' request to transit the area, Park 
said.  He added that the DPRK did not transship through ROK 
ports and that its ships had passed through ROK territorial 
waters 140 times over the past year.  On 40 of those 
occasions, the DPRK vessels had stopped at a ROK port to pick 
up needed shipments of humanitarian aid. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Other Issues Requiring Continued Consultations 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶13.   (S) DFM Park and U/S Joseph agreed the United States 
and ROK should consult again on implementation of UNSCR 1718 
after each side had finished preparing its respective reports 
to the UN Security Council.  Park inquired about automatic 
sanctions under the Glenn Amendment and asked when this might 
come into effect.  U/S Joseph replied that the President 
would make the final decision on that.  Whatever sanctions 
the U.S. chose to implement would send an important symbolic 
message, he added. 
 
¶14.  (S) Asked about ROK banking activities with the DPRK, 
Park said that the ROKG has taken a close look, but had found 
no transactions with suspect DPRK entities.  That was because 
South Korean banks were very cautious about dealing with the 
DPRK since "they do not wish to be branded," Park explained. 
He said he did not believe the DPRK would conduct a second 
nuclear test "because the USG had already confirmed to the 
world that the DPRK is, in fact, a nuclear power."  He 
claimed a second test would result in a significant change in 
ROKG policy toward the North.  U/S Joseph indirectly 
contested Park's judgment, noting the most significant 
threshold had been crossed with the first test. 
 
¶15.  (S) DFM Park expressed doubt about the capability of the 
DPRK's longer range missiles, noting that a Chinese official 
had told him the PRC had tested its ICBM missiles at the rate 
of one a month for 15 years before perfecting that 
capability.  He encouraged the United States to work closely 
with China on implementation of UNSCR 1718, pointing out that 
the 1,400 km border between the PRC and DPRK was a large 
vulnerability within the global nonproliferation regime. 
Turning to the Six-Party Talks, Park argued that blocking the 
DPRK's proliferation of nuclear materials was subordinate to 
our primary task of convincing Pyongyang to give up those 
materials in the first place.  In making this point Park 
employed phrasing our Blue House contacts have attributed 
directly to President Roh -- that we need to deal with the 
nuclear issue both vertically (through the 6PT) as well as 
horizontally (through nonproliferation efforts).  U/S Joseph 
pointed out that the USG had made a tremendous diplomatic 
effort through its participation in the Six-Party Talks, but 
that pressure resulting from UNSCR 1718 was clearly key to 
Pyongyang's decision to return to the talks.   Continued 
pressure was the only way the talks would have a chance of 
succeeding, he told Park. 
 
¶16.  (S) At the conclusion of their working lunch, DFM Park 
briefly raised the issue of Iran's nuclear program, asking 
for U/S Joseph's views on Iran's ultimate goals, and 
expressing concern that the nuclear nonproliferation regime 
-- Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) and International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) -- did not appear up to the task 
of halting the proliferation of nuclear weapons.  Both agreed 
 
Iran sought to use nuclear status to become the leading 
country in the Middle East.  If the DPRK, Iran and other 
countries continue on the road toward the development of 
nuclear weapons, perhaps we need to look at changing the 
modalities of the global nuclear nonproliferation regime, 
Park suggested. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) U/S Joseph has cleared this message. 
VERSHBOW
</file>