^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3684  |  2006-10-27 02:30  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PINR PREL ABLD KS KN }}  |
====== 제 목: 이상득 국회 부의장 북한과 한미동맹 문제 언급 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 003684 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))
국방부망 배포
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 09/08/2016 
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PINR(([Intelligence])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), ABLD(([Buildings and Grounds])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)]))
제 목: 이상득 국회 부의장 북한과 한미동맹 문제 언급
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/04 00:08//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점: 10월 25일 버시바우 대사와 함께한 오찬 회동에서 한나라당 국회 부의장 이상득은 한미동맹과 작전통제권 이양, 북한 문제 등에 대한 노무현 정부의 국정 운영에 대한 우려에 더해 일반적인 노무현에 대한 불만을 드러냈다. 미국의 최고 동반자는 한나라당이라는 것이 이상득의 분명한 메시지였다. 만일 한나라당이 2008년에 정권을 잡게 되면 현재 한미 간의 갈등 중 상당수가 사라질 거라는 평은 과소평가이다. 논의는 우호적이었다. 두 명의 한나라당 친미 의원인 정형근과 전여옥이 국회 부의장과 동행하였다. 버시바우 대사는 국내 정치 팀장을 대동하였다. 요약 끝.

===== 라이스 국무장관의 방한 =====

국방부망 배포
2. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 10월 25일 오찬 회동 중에 북한의 10월 9일 핵 실험에 어떻게 대응할지 포괄적인 접근 방식을 마련하기 위해 여전히 한국 정부와 협력 중이라고 말했고 라이스 국무장관의 방한도 순조로웠다고 말하였다. 라이스 국무장관은 한국 정부가 단행해야 할 구체적인 대북 조치를 요청하려 한국에 온 것은 아니다. 라이스 국무장관의 메시지는 양국이 북한의 도발적인 행동을 국제사회는 용납하지 않겠다는 단호한 의지를 북한에 확실하게 전달할 필요가 있다는 것이다. 10월 9일 북한의 핵 실험에 뒤이어진 국무장관의 10월 19~20일 방한 기간에 그녀는 미국의 우방인 한국과 일본의 곁을 지킬 것이며 동맹국으로써 안보 다짐에 충실히 부응할 거라고 말하였다.

===== 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호 =====

3. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 한국이 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호 이행 방안에 대한 검토를 마무리할 필요가 있다는 점을 미국은 이해하고 있다고 말하였다. 제재 대상인 북한의 기업체 목록을 비롯해 유엔 안보리 결의안 1718호의 이행 요건에 따른 구체적인 조치를 유엔제재위원회가 세목을 적시하기까지 꽤 시간이 소요될 걸 거라고 지적하였다. 외교를 통해서 한반도를 비핵화하자는 미국의 목표에는 변함이 없음에 더해 북한이 비핵화에 나설 준비가 되어 있다면 6자 회담 복귀를 위한 문호는 열려 있다.

4. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 한나라당의 강성 기조에 더해 전면적인 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호 이행에 대해 찬성 의사를 표시한 많은 국회의원에게 감사한다고 말했다. 동시에 집권당인 열린우리당에서 전해지는 불분명한 신호에 더해 우리당 지도부와 일부 집권당 의원들이 10월 20일 개성공단을 방문하는 걸 보고 버시바우 대사는 놀랐다.

5. (기밀) 그러나 신호는 불분명하더라도 북한의 핵 실험에 대해 강력한 대응을 할 필요가 있음을 한국 정부가 이해하리라 버시바우 대사는 확신한다고 말하였다. 미국과 한국 간에 이견을 부각하기엔 너무 이르고 부적절하다. 왜냐면 미국과 한국이 결국에 뭉치게 될 것이기 때문이다. 버시바우 대사는 실제 한미관계가 생각하는 것만큼 나쁘지 않다고 지적하였다.

===== 개성공단과 금강산 =====

6. (기밀) 한나라당 정형근 최고의원은 북한이 자체 핵 사업을 멈추기 전까지 개성공단과 금강산 사업은 모두 중지돼야 한다는 게 한나라당의 생각이라고 말했다. 북한에 20억 달러를 제공해서 이 현금이 미사일과 핵 사업에 사용되었을 개연성으로 보아 이는 하나의 사기극이다. 정형근은 개성공단과 금강산에 대한 힐 차관보의 발언은 불분명한 신호를 주고 있다며 힐 차관보의 성명은 미국이 개성공단을 지지한다는 것인지 물었다.

7. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 미국은 개성공단을 승인하지 않았으며, 다만 금강산 관광 사업보다 개성공단 사업이 긍정적으로 볼 구석이 있다는 점을 인정했을 뿐이라고 말하였다. 한국은 직/간접적으로 북한의 미사일과 핵 사업에 기금으로 조성될만한 모든 형태의 (대북 지원) 방법과 지렛대를 재검토해야만 한다. 그는 힐 차관보의 발언은 개성공단 사업에 대한 승인 날인이 아니라, 오히려 양대 남북 사업을 비교한 거라고 재차 언급하였다.

8. (기밀) 남북 사업과 관련해 한국 정부가 그 어떤 수정을 가하더라도 미국은 지지할 것이며, 그러한 수정은 한국에 달려 있다고 강조하였다. 우리는 한국이 양대 남북 사업을 어느 것이든 종식하라고 한국에 요청하지 않았지만, 돈이 직접 북한의 미사일 사업에 흘러가지 않더라도 한국은 해당 자금이 그러한 사업을 지원하는 데 간접적으로 흘러갈 여지를 염두에 두어야 한다.

===== 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호: 개성공단과 금강산 사업을 포함해? =====

9. (기밀) 정 의원은 개성공단과 금강산 사업은 구체적으로 언급하지 않았다는 게 한국 정부의 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호에 대한 해석인 까닭에 한국은 남북 경협 사업을 계속할 수 있다고 말하였다. 그는 양대 사업이 북한 정권에 현금을 제공했기 때문에 유감스러운 일이라고 말하였다. 그는 만일 양대 남북 사업이 종식되면 한반도 상의 대결로 나가게 될 것이라고 노무현 정부가 국민을 납득시키려 노력하고 있다고 덧붙였다. 그런 연유로 노무현은 그간 한나라당이 전쟁을 원하며 열린우리당은 평화를 대변한다고 말해왔다.

10. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호가 개성공단과 금강산 관광을 명시적으로 다루지 않은 건 아마도 사실일 수 있으며 한국에 대해 어떠한 조치를 단행할 것을 요구하지는 않는다고 확실히 밝혔다. 그렇긴 하지만, 그는 한국이 최소한 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호 정신에 입각해 대북 사업에 대한 정책을 조정하길 희망한다.

===== 북한―6자 회담 =====

11. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 북한이 6자 회담에 복귀할 기회가 여전히 있다고 말하였다. 양국은 단계적인 성격의 대북 접근 방식이 되어야 하며 여전히 외교로 북한 문제를 푸는 것이 상책이다. 버시바우 대사는 여론조사와 전문가에 의하면 한나라당 의원 대다수는 남북 교류에 반대하지는 않지만, 남북 관계를 추구하는 방식에 생각을 달리한다고 언급했다. 이상득은 그게 정확한 인식이며, 그런 관계가 일정한 형태를 띤다면 북한 문제에 진전을 이룰 방식이다.

12. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 일부 사람들은 우리가 북한의 변화를 추진하는 걸 두고 정권 교체에 대한 열망과 동일하게 생각한다고 언급하였다. 사실은 미국은 북한 내부의 변화를 원함에 더해 (6자회담) 협상이 재계 되면 항구적인 한반도에 평화가 이뤄질 수 있도록 북한 내부 변화를 추진할 것이다.

===== 군사 개발 =====

13. (기밀) 이상득은 미국이 북한을 핵보유국으로 수용할 수 있는지 물었고, 버시바우 대사는 미국은 핵 무장한 북한은 언제가 됐건 용인할 수 없다고 말하였다. 이상득은 한국 정부가 10월 25일 1,000km 순항 미사일 시험 발사에 성공했다고 발표한 일에 대해 우려를 표명함에 더해 긴장이 조성된 시기에 해당 발표를 하게 된 한국 정부의 동기에 대해 의문을 품었다. 전여옥 최고의원은 한국 정부가 10월 9일 핵 실험에 대한 대응 조치로 뭔가 하고 있다고 사람들이 생각하도록 한국 정부가 당해 발표를 이용하고 있다고 말하였다.

14. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 순항 미사일 사업은 한국군 현대화 작업에 속하는 일단의 인상적인 노력이라고 말하였다. 순항 미사일 역량은 한국이 북한보다 더 강력한 기술력을 보유했으며 북한보다 기술력에서도 압도적인 우위를 점하고 있다는 사실을 돋보이게 한다.

===== 김대중 전임 대통령 =====

15. (기밀) 전여옥은 현재 (6자회담이) 꽉 막힌 상태에 대해 북미 대화가 없다고 비난한 김대중 전 대통령의 최근 발언을 유감스럽게 느낀다며 김대중이 실제로 무슨 생각을 하는 것인지 버시바우 대사에게 물었다.

16. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 그가 김 전 대통령과 지난번 7월에 회동할 당시 김 전 대통령에게 방북을 취소하라고 요청하지 않았다고 말하였다. 두 사람은 북한 문제 해결 방식에 관하여 얘기했으며, 버시바우 대사는 미국이 외교를 진지하게 대하고 있으며 만일 북한이 비핵화한다면 북한 사람들을 돕기 위해 여러 긍정적인 조치에 나설 준비가 되어 있다고 버시바우 대사가 김 전 대통령에게 말했다. 김대중은 미국의 접근 방식에 대해 미심쩍어했지만, 북한 미사일 발사의 여파로 그 스스로 방북을 취소하기로 하였다.

17. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 교통수단의 난맥상이 있었고 북한이 김대중의 방북에 관심을 보이지 않았던 사실로 미루어 취소된 듯 보인다고 말했다. 버시바우 대사는 김대중의 개인적인 시각은 그의 공개 석상 발언보다 미국의 시각과 더 비슷하다고 말했다. 북한이 점진적인 내부 변화와 개혁에 나서야겠지만, 구소련 연방과 같은 식으로 개방해야 한다고 김대중이 말한 것에 대해 버시바우 대사는 고무적이었다고 말했다.

18. (기밀) 북한에 관한 김대중의 철학, 전략, 원칙은 미국 정부의 그것과 비슷하지만, 그 정책을 실천하는 방식에 대한 문제에서 일부 이견이 있다고 버시바우 대사는 결론지었다. 외교술이 더 효과를 보려면 물리력의 지원을 받아야 하고, 만일 북한이 자신의 약정을 성실히 이행하지 못한다면 대가가 있을 것임을 우리가 북한에 이해시켜야 한다.

===== 박근혜 평양행? =====

19. (기밀) 전 의원은 북한이 박근혜의 평양 방문을 초대했다는 보도가 있다고 말하였다. 보도의 출처는 열린우리당 최성 의원이며, 공식적인 방북 요청은 아니었다. 전여옥은 평양 초청은 황당하다고 박근혜가 말하였다고 했다. 박근혜는 김정일과의 핫라인을(직통 전화) 보유하고 있지만, 사용한 바 없다.

===== 고립 =====

20. (기밀) 북한의 고립과 관련해서 만일 북한이 도발적인 행보를 계속한다면, 더욱 고립된다는 점을 북한 지도자들은 이해해야만 한다고 버시바우 대사는 말하였다. 중국은 북한으로 유입되는 상품이나 돈의 흐름을 옥죄는 일과 은행 거래에 대해 더 제약을 가하는 등 나름의 역할을 하고 있다. 흐트러짐이 없도록 하는 것이 평화를 이룩하는 상책이다; 부시 대통령은 한반도 상에 전쟁을 원하지 않음에 더해 대북 억지력을 담보하고 한반도 평화를 지속하도록 우방인 남한 사람들과 긴밀하게 협력하길 원한다고 버시바우 대사는 말하였다.

===== 전시 작전통제권 =====

21. (기밀) 이상득은 한미 양국 국방장관이 함께하는 10월 20일 한미 연례안보협의회의 합의 내용을 거론하면서 2009~2012년을 전시 작전통제권 이양 시기로 잡은 것은 너무 이르다고 말하였다. 이상득은 그 합의에 대해 논의할 시간이 더 있어야만 하며, 그 합의는 너무 조급하게 이루어졌다고 말하였다.

22. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 지휘 관계에 관한 10월 20일 한미 연례안보협의회의 합의는 작통권 이양 시기 문제에서 타협을 이룬 양호한 합의라고 말했다. 2007년 봄에 완성될 예정인 작전통제권 이양 로드맵에 관한 더 세부적인 작업이 예고되어 있다. 전작권 이양에도 한미동맹과 미국의 헌신, 미국의 군사력은 북한의 위협을 억지하는 필수 요소로 계속 유지될 것이다. 전작권 이양에 관한 합의는 자연스러운 이양으로 가는 현실적인 로드맵을 제공함에 더해 한미동맹은 전작권 이양 이후에 더욱 강해질 것이다. 이상득 부의장의 워싱턴 방문과 미국의 지도자들에게 피력한 한나라당 지도부의 우려 목소리도 작통권 이양 시기와 관련해 영향을 미쳤음에 더해 한층 유연성을 발휘하도록 미국인들을 이해시키는데 도움이 되었다고 버시바우 대사는 말하였다.

23. (기밀) 노무현 정부가 2007년 대선 중에 작통권 이양을 정치적 쟁점으로 이용할 것이며, 한국 정부 사람들이 미국으로부터 “주권”을 쟁취했다고 주장할 거라고 이상득은 말하였다. 이상득은 미국이 한국 내 반미 감정을 억제하기 위해 작통권 이양에 합의했다는 생각이 들지만, 한국이 베트남과 이라크에 파병한 일과 미국의 글로벌 구상에 대해 지지한 일로 방증 되듯 실상은 한국민의 거의 80%가 강력한 한미 동맹을 신봉한다고 그는 말했다. 이상득은 차기 한국 정부 임기 중에는 이러한 강력한 한미동맹을 건설하길 고대하였다.

24. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 반미 감정에 대한 우려는 작통권 이양을 추동한 고려 사항이 아니었으며, 오히려 한국이 더 많은 책임을 수행할 경우 더 건실한 동맹이 이뤄질 것이라고 말했다. 우리는 이제 작통권 합의를 이뤘다; 이제 초점은 작통권 이양을 안전하게 구현하는 일에 맞춰져야만 한다.

===== 2007년 대선 =====

25. (기밀) 오찬이 끝났을 때, 버시바우 대사는 이상득에게 동생인 전 서울 시장이며 한나라당 대통령 후보인 이명박의 정치적 전망에 대해 어떻게 생각하는지 물었다. 이상득은 한국에선 문화적인 이유로 자신의 동생의 정치적 대선 도전에 대해 절대 관여해서는 안 된다고 말했다. 그는 2002년 대선 후보 이회창이 오랜 시간 동안 모든 대권 도전자보다도 크게 앞서 갔지만, 패했다. 그런 이유로 한나라당 내 누구도 마지막 여론조사에 대해 특별한 의미를 두지 않았었다고 지적하였다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3684|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL3684.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003684 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL ABLD KS KN
SUBJECT: GNP PARLIAMENTARY VICE SPEAKER LEE SANG-DEUK ON 
NORTH KOREA AND ALLIANCE ISSUES 
 
Classified By: Amb. Alexander Vershbow.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: In a lunch meeting on October 25 with the 
Ambassador, GNP National Assembly Vice Speaker Lee expressed 
concern over the Roh administration's handling of the 
U.S.-ROK alliance, OPCON transfer, North Korea and expressed 
general dissatisfatction with Roh.  Lee's clear message was 
that the GNP was the best partner for the U.S., and the point 
unstated was that if the GNP came to power in 2008, many of 
the current frictions between the U.S. and Korea would 
disappear.  The discussions were friendly.  Accompanying the 
Vice Speaker were two pro-U.S. GNP lawmakers Chung Hyung-keun 
and Chun Yu-ok.  POL Internal Chief accompanied the 
Ambassador.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SECRETARY RICE'S VISIT TO SEOUL 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) During a lunch meeting on October 25, the Ambassador 
said we were still working with the ROKG to come to a common 
approach on how to respond to the October 9 nuclear test by 
the DPRK and said Secretary Rice's visit to Korea went well. 
The Secretary did not visit to request specific measures that 
the ROKG should take toward North Korea.  The Secretary's 
message was that we need to send a strong signal of resolve 
to North Korea, making clear that its provocative actions 
were not acceptable to the international community.  During 
her October 19-20 visit to Korea she said that the U.S. would 
stand by its allies, Korea and Japan, in the wake of the 
nuclear test by North Korea on October 9 and meet fully our 
security commitments. 
 
UNSCR 1718 
---------- 
 
¶3.  (C) The Ambassador said we understood that the ROK needed 
to complete a review on ways to implement UNSCR 1718.  In 
addition, he noted it would be some time before the UN 
Sanctions Committee spelled out the specific actions required 
to implement UNSCR 1718, including the list of North Korean 
companies that will be sanctioned.  The U.S. goal remains to 
denuclearize the Peninsula through diplomacy and the door 
remains open for North Korea to come back to the Six Party 
Talks if they are ready to denuclearize. 
 
¶4.  (C) The Ambassador said he appreciated the strong Grand 
National Party (GNP) stance and the many National Assembly 
members who have spoken out in favor of full implementation 
of UNSCR 1718.  At the same time, he was surprised by the 
mixed signals sent by the ruling Uri party and by the visit 
to Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC) by the leader and some 
members of the ruling party on October 20. 
 
¶5.  (C) However, despite the mixed signals, the Ambassador 
said he was confident that the ROKG understood they needed to 
make a strong response to the nuclear test.  It was too early 
and inappropriate to highlight differences between the U.S. 
and the ROK, since at the end of the day the U.S. and the ROK 
are and will be together.  The Ambassador noted that the 
perception of the U.S.-ROK relationship was often worse than 
the reality. 
 
KIC AND MT. KUMGANG 
-------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) GNP Supreme Council Member Chung Hyung-keun said that 
the GNP thought both KIC and Mt. Kumgang projects should be 
suspended until North Korea stopped its nuclear program.  It 
was a travesty that $2 billion had been given to the DPRK and 
this cash had likely been used to develop missile and nuclear 
programs.  A/S Hill's statements about KIC and Mt. Kumgang 
sent a mixed signal and Chung asked if Hill's message meant 
that the United States supported KIC. 
 
¶7.  (C) The Ambassador said that the U.S. did not endorse 
KIC, but rather acknowledged that there was a positive 
rationale for this project relative to the Mt. Kumgang 
tourism project.  The ROK should review all of its forms of 
leverage and ways that indirectly or directly fund the DPRK's 
missile and nuclear programs.  He reiterated that Hill's 
comments were not a stamp of approval of the project but 
rather a comparison of the two inter-Korean projects. 
 
 
¶8.  (C) The Ambassador emphasized that the U.S. supported 
whatever changes the ROKG decided to make regarding the 
inter-Korean projects, and that the changes were up to the 
ROK.  We have not asked the ROK to terminate either of its 
projects, but even if the money going North does not go 
directly into missile development, the ROK should be mindful 
of any possibility that the money could go indirectly to 
support these programs. 
 
UNSCR 1718: KIC AND MT. KUMGANG INCLUDED? 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (C) Rep. Chung said that the ROKG's interpretation of 
UNSCR 1718 was that KIC and Mt. Kumgang were not specifically 
mentioned and therefore the ROK could continue with both 
inter-Korean economic projects.  He said this was regrettable 
since both projects provided cash to the North Korean regime. 
He added the Roh administration was trying to convince people 
that if the two inter-Korean projects were ended, it would 
lead to confrontation on the Peninsula.  From this, Roh has 
said that the GNP wanted war and the Uri Party represented 
peace. 
 
¶10.  (C) The Ambassador asserted that it might be true that 
UNSCR 1718 did not specifically address KIC or Mt. Kumgang 
and that it did not technically require any action by the 
ROK.  That said, he hoped the ROK would decide, at a minimum, 
to make adjustments in their policy toward the projects that 
were consistent with the spirit of UNSCR 1718. 
 
NORTH KOREA-SIX PARTY TALKS 
--------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (C) The Ambassador said there was still a chance that 
North Korea will return to the Six Party Talks.  There should 
be a step-by-step character to our approach to North Korea 
and diplomacy was still the best way to solve the North Korea 
problem.  The Ambassador remarked that according to polls and 
pundits, most GNP members were not against engagement, but 
had different ideas on how to pursue it.  Lee agreed that 
this was an accurate perception and that engagement, in some 
form, was the way forward with North Korea. 
 
¶12.  (C) The Ambassador mentioned that some people think our 
push for change in North Korea equaled a desire for regime 
change.  The reality was that the U.S. wants internal changes 
in North Korea and that if negotiations restarted we would 
push for internal reforms in North Korea so that there could 
be more durable peace on the Peninsula. 
 
MILITARY DEVELOPMENT 
-------------------- 
 
¶13.  (C) Lee asked if the U.S. could accept the North as a 
nuclear power and the Ambassador said that the U.S. could not 
accept a nuclear-armed North Korea at any time.  Lee 
expressed concern that the ROKG had announced a successful 
test of a 1000km cruise missile October 25 and questioned the 
ROKG's motivation for making the announcement during a time 
of tension.   Supreme Council Member Chun Yu-ok said that the 
ROKG was using the announcement to make people think that the 
ROKG was doing something in response to the October 9 nuclear 
test. 
 
¶14.  (C) The Ambassador said that the cruise missile program 
was part of an impressive set of efforts to modernize the ROK 
military.  The cruise missile capability highlighted the fact 
that the ROK had a stronger technical capability than North 
Korea and a commanding technological edge over the DPRK. 
 
FORMER ROK PRESIDENT KIM DAE-JUNG 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (C) Chun said she felt that former President Kim 
Dae-jung's recent statements blaming the lack of U.S.-DPRK 
dialogue on the current impasse were regrettable and asked 
the Ambassador what he thought Kim's real views were. 
 
¶16.  (C) The Ambassador said that last time he met with 
former President Kim in July he did not ask Kim to cancel his 
planned visit to North Korea.  They spoke about how to solve 
 
the North Korea problem and he told Kim the U.S. was serious 
about diplomacy and was ready to make many positive steps to 
help the North Korean people if North Korea denuclearized. 
Kim was skeptical of the U.S. approach, but made his own 
decision to cancel his trip in the aftermath of the missile 
launches. 
 
¶17.  (C) The Ambassador said the cancellation was likely due 
to the fact that there were logistical difficulties and North 
Korea did not seem interested in Kim's visit.  He said that 
Kim's private views were more similar to the U.S. views than 
his public statements, and he was encouraged that Kim said 
that North Korea should be opened, like the former Soviet 
Union, through a gradual process that involved internal 
change and reform. 
 
¶18.  (C) The Ambassador concluded that Kim's philosophy, 
tactics and principles regarding North Korea were similar to 
those of the USG but the question of how to implement the 
policy was where there were some differences.  Diplomacy, to 
be effective, had to be backed by force and we had to 
convince North Korea that there will be costs if they did not 
fulfill their commitments. 
 
PARK GEUN-HYE TO PYONGYANG? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶19.  (C) Rep. Chun said that there were reports that North 
Korea invited Park Geun-hye to visit Pyongyang.  The reports 
came from Uri Party Rep. Choi Song and it was not an official 
invitation.   Chun said that Park had said the invitation was 
absurd.  Park had a hotline with Kim Jong-il but had not used 
it. 
 
ISOLATION 
--------- 
 
¶20.  (C) In terms of isolating North Korea, the North's 
leaders should understand that if they continued on their 
path of provocative behavior, they will become more isolated, 
the Ambassador said.  China was doing its part by tightening 
its controls on the flow of goods and money into North Korea 
and imposing tighter restrictions on banking.  Firmness was 
the best way to achieve peace; President Bush did not want a 
war on the Korean Peninsula and wanted to work closely with 
our South Korean allies to ensure North Korea was deterred 
and the Peninsula remained safe, the Ambassador said. 
 
OPCON 
----- 
 
¶21.  (C) Lee brought up the October 20 agreement at the SCM 
between the U.S. and ROK Defense Ministers and said that the 
2009-2012 time period for the transfer of wartime OPCON 
control was too soon.  He said there should have been more 
time to discuss the agreement and that the agreement had been 
made too quickly. 
 
¶22.  (C) The Ambassador said the October 20 SCM agreement on 
command relations was a good compromise on the timing issue 
regarding OPCON transfer.  There would be more detailed work 
on the roadmap to OPCON transfer to be completed by spring 
¶2007.  Despite the transfer, the alliance, the U.S. 
commitment and U.S. power will remain integral elements in 
deterring North Korean threats.  The agreement on OPCON 
transfer presented a realistic roadmap to a natural 
transition and the alliance will be stronger after the 
transition.  The Ambassador said that the trip by Vice 
Speaker Lee to Washington D.C. and the concerns the GNP 
leadership voiced to U.S. leaders had made an impact and 
helped convince the U.S. to be more flexible regarding the 
timing of the transfer. 
 
¶23.  (C) Lee said the Roh government would use the transfer 
of OPCON as a political issue during the 2007 campaign and 
claim they wrested "sovereignty" from the U.S.  He said he 
thought the U.S. agreed to the transfer of OPCON to limit 
anti-American sentiment in Korea but in fact he said that 
almost 80 percent of Korean people believe in a strong 
U.S.-ROK alliance, as evidenced by ROK commitment of troops 
in Vietnam and Iraq and support for U.S. global initiatives. 
Lee looked forward to building on this strong alliance during 
 
the next ROK administration. 
 
¶24.  (C) The Ambassador said that the concern over 
anti-American sentiment was not the driving consideration 
that led to the transfer of OPCON but rather that we would 
have a healthier alliance if the ROK carried more 
responsibility.  We now had an agreement; the focus should be 
on safe implementation of the transfer. 
 
2007 ELECTIONS 
-------------- 
 
¶25.  (C) As the lunch finished, the Ambassador asked how Lee 
felt about the political prospects of his brother, former 
Seoul Mayor and GNP Presidential candidate Lee Myung-bak. 
Lee said that in Korea, for cultural reasons, he must stay 
out of his brother's political race.  He noted that the 2002 
GNP candidate, Lee Hoi-chang, had a strong lead over all 
challengers for a long time and lost, so therefore no one in 
the GNP attached any particular meaning to the latest poll 
data. 
VERSHBOW
</file>