^  문서참조번호 ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL2505  |  2006-07-25 09:03  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>ETRD KS }}  | 
====== 제 목: 의약품과 한미 FTA : 상황의 역전 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 002505 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국무부 산하 [[http://www.state.gov/e/eb/tpp/|경제기업국, 무역정책 및 프로그램]]((번역 주: Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, Trade Policy and Programs))
[[wp>United_States_National_Security_Council| 국가안전보장회의]] 통김((번역 주: Tong, 김동현(통킴) 존스홉킨스대 교수, 자문위원 ))귀하
상무부 4431/시장접근 및 이행감시국/기획예산실/동아태/듀튼((MAC/OPB/EAP/DUTTON))
무역 대표부 바티아((번역 주: Karan Bhatia, 부대표)), 커틀러, 오저롯((번역 주: 애로 오저롯(Arrow Augerot) , 부대표보))

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 07/25/2016 
태그 ETRD (([Foreign Trade])), KS (([Korea (South)])) 
제 목: 의약품과 한미 FTA : 상황의 역전
참조: 가. SEOUL 2421 나. STATE 116991 다. SEOUL 2210
분류자: 대사 알렉산더 버쉬바우((Ambassador Alexander Vershbow.)) 근거 1.4 (B,D & E)  
번역자: PoirotKr (번역 주: 트위터 사용자 이름) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/10/07 15:18//

===== 요약 =====
1. (기밀) 요약: 한국의 <wrap hi>약제비 적정화 방안</wrap> 실행 규정 초안 공표가 7월 26일로 일정이 잡힌 가운데 한국 정부는 한미 FTA 의약품 처리 문제와 관련해 우리에게 약속했던 모든 핵심 공약이 느리되 꾸준히 후퇴하고 있다. 그리고 이제는 한미 FTA 의약품 작업반에서 (참조 가) 새로운 <wrap hi>"포지티브 리스트"</wrap> 제도의 규정을 협상한다는 공약을 이제 철회하였다. 동 실행 규정에 대한 60일 의견 수렴 기간이 예고된 바대로 7월 26일 공표와(고시) 함께 시작될 것이다. 그러나 한국 정부는 현재 동 의견 수렴 기간을 한국 정부와 산업계 사이 토론이라고 생각하고 있다. 다만 한미 FTA 의약품 작업반 내부 논의에 대해 협상이 아닌 정보 교환으로 성격을 규정하고 있다. 제안된 의약품 규정은 시장 접근성을 제한하는 비관세장벽으로 우리가 한미 FTA를 통해서 줄여나가려 했던 불투명한 규제 중의 전형적인 사례이다. 지금까지 한국 정부가 한미 FTA 의약품 문제를 처리하는 양상이 해당 의약품 작업반 범위를 넘어서는 우려가 제기되기 때문에 미 대사관은 강력하되 점진적인 대응을 권고한다: (1) 한국 정부의 협상 거부를 수용할 수 없다고 거절하라; (2) 의약품의 "포지티브 리스트" 제도하의 의약품 승인(보험등재), 약제비 급여 규정 협상을 고수하라; (3) 8월 중순부터 말까지 한미 FTA 의약품 작업반 임시 회의를 요구하고, 그 회의에서 미국은 종합적인 제안을 제출하라. 그리고 (4) 한국 정부가 성실한 협상을 거부하면 3차 한미 FTA 협상 일정을 연기하라. 자세한 사항은 11문단에. 요약 끝.<WRAP center round info 90%>//**약제비 적정화 방안과 선별등재목록(포지티브 리스트)란 무엇인가?**// 약제비적정화방안이란 무엇인가? 이 방안은 비용효과성을 기준으로 의약품을 선별하여 보험등재하고 국민건강보험공단이 약가협상력을 가지도록 하는 것을 골자로 한다. 이는 궁극적으로 약제비절감을 목표로 삼고 있다. 기존에는, 안전하고 효과적이라면 모든 약을 보험등재해주었지만, 이제는 안전하고 효과적이며 비용 면에서도 만족스러운 약만 보험등재를 해주는 것이다. 그러면 제약사간에 약을 선별등재목록에 포함시키기 위해 비용효과면에서 경쟁을 더욱 촉진하게 되고 결국 약제비를 절감할 수 있다는 말이다. [[https://www.evernote.com/shard/s258/sh/be7852af-04f0-4892-aa2b-ce9274817391/8f823404c0c5f80a50ab1bbd5e6e2aca|약제비 적정화 방안과 한미 FTA 쟁점은 무엇인가?]] //권미란(공공의약센터)// 일독을 권합니다.8-)
</WRAP>

===== 배경: 한국정부의 약속 파기 =====

2. (민감하지만 미분류) '참조 가' 논의에서 살펴보았듯이, 7월 24일 목요일 현지시각 19시에 (워싱턴 시간 6시) 외교통상부는 미국 정부와 미국 현지 이해당사자들에게 전송하기 위해 서울 주재 미국 대사관과 워싱턴 주재 한국 대사관을 통해 약제비 적정화 방안 실행 규정 초안을 보냈다. 26쪽의 초안은 한국어로만 제공됐다. 외교통상부는 한국이 제안하는 규정 변경 사항에 대한 2개의 관련 영어 해설문을 전달했고 미 산업계는 한국의 규정 초안에 대한 영어 번역을 12시간 만에 제공하였다. 그러나 한국 정부와(참조 가) 함께 논의한 대로 애초 동 규정 초안 문건의 인도 기한과 관련해 보건복지부는 7월 26일 수요일에 실행 규정 초안을 공개하기로 계획하면서 동 문건에 대해 미국 측이 검토하거나 견해를 밝힐 시간이 동 문서 공표를 앞두고 근무일 하루로 제한되었다. 더구나, 외교통상부는 60일간의 공식 의견 수렴 기간이 한국 내에서 7월 26일부로 시작된다고 하면서도 한미 FTA 의약품/의료기기 작업반의 여하한 실행 규정 초안 토론은 실행 규정에 대한 세부 협상이 아닌 정보 교환이 될 거라고 전해왔다. 미 대사관은 보건복지부가 7월 24일에 한국 언론을 상대로 실행 규정 초안에 관한 브리핑을 했음을 알게 되었다. 다만 7월 26일까지 보도 금지령을 내린 상태였다. 늘 그렇듯이 보도금지령은 지켜지지 않았고 초안에 관한 기사가 7월 25일 정오에 터져 나왔다.

3. (민감하지만 미분류) 7월 25일 청와대 회동과 한국 측 한미 FTA 협상본부장과 함께한 회동에서 미 대사와 방한 중인 상무부 프랭크 라빈 차관은 한국 정부가 공표 이전에 실행 규정 초안에 대해 유의미한 검토와 의견을 밝힐 기회를 우리에게 약속했을 뿐만 아니라 한미 FTA 의약품/의료기기 작업반의 틀 속에서 해당 규정의 실질적 내용에 대해 협상할 기회를 약속했었다는 점을 문제 삼아 압박하였다. 당시에 의약품 작업반 회담이 두 주전 한미 FTA 서울 협상 중에 중단되었던 상태라 미국 정부는 포지티브 리스트를 하나의 개념으로 수용하는 대신에 새 접근 방식의 투명성과 실행 관련 대화를 반대급부로 요구하였다. 한국 정부는 현재 해당 공약과 관련 현재 후퇴하고 있는 듯 보이며 버시바우 대사와 상무부 라빈 차관은 이런 부정적인 경과에 대해 미국 정부가 대응에 나설 것임을 분명히 하였다.

4. (민감하지만 미분류) 상기한 내용에 대한 대응으로 청와대 윤대희 경제수석은 [국방부망 배포] 실행 규정 초안에 대한 한국 정부 내부 토론이 주말 내내 계속되었다고 확인해 주었다. 그러나 그는 토론 결과 중의 하나는 한미 FTA 의약품/의료기기 작업반 내부 대화는 세부 규정 협상이 아니라 정보 교환이라고 시인하였다. 윤대희는 실행 규정 초안의 공개와 관련 정부 입장을 조정하는 국무위원으로 권오규 경제부총리를 지목하였다.

5. (민감하지만 미분류) 한국 측 한미 FTA 통상교섭 수석대표 김종훈은 한국 정부 관련 기관 논의 결과에 대해 낙담을 토로하며 그와 김현종 통상교섭본부장이 바랬던 방향으로 일이 풀리지 않았다고 말하였다. 그러나 김종훈은 첫째로 협상의 답보상태를 그다음엔 투명성과 대화 요구에 대해 한국 정부가 자체 약속을 준수했는지 절차적인 측면에 초점을 맞추기보다는 미국 측이 포지티브 리스트 제안의 실질적인 내용상의 실제 문제를 구체적으로 거론해 달라는 한국 정부의 앞선 요청을 (참조 다) 반복하였다. 그는 동 제안 자체에 무슨 문제가 있는지 전혀 이해를 못 하고 있다며 약제비 적정화 방안은 비차별적이며 과학에 기초한 거라고 버시바우 대사와 라빈 차관에게 장담하였다.

6. (기밀) 윤대희와 김종훈과 함께한 회동 이후에 김현종 통상교섭본부장은 7월 24일 오후에 버시바우 대사에게 전화를 걸어왔다. 김현종은 한국 정부가 다짐한 대로 실행 규정 초안의 공표 시기와 관련해 "필사적으로 싸웠다"고 말했다(즉 미국 정부와 사전 공표 내용을 공유하고 한국의 공표에 앞서 유의미한 의견 수렴이 가능하도록 하고, 공표에 맞춰 60일간의 공식 의견 수렴 기간이 시작되도록 하며 한미 FTA 의약품/의료기기 작업반 내에서 협상 기회를 제공하는 등). 김현종은 동 규정 초안의 공개 과정에 관해 토론한 7월 21일 청와대 회의는 한국 정부가 "4개의 선결과제" (자동차, 쇠고기, 의약품, 스크린 쿼터)에 합의함으로써 한미 FTA 협상을 시작하기도 전에 굴복했다는 언론의 주장에 대해 강력한 여론의 역풍에 초점이 맞춰줬다고 말했다. 지난주 한 MBC TV 프로그램은 미국 정부 관리가 상술한 4가지 사항을 언급한 내용을 내보냈는데, 그 방송으로 개인적으로 김 본부장 등 FTA 찬성론자들이 압박을 받고 있다고 말했다.

7. (기밀) 김 본부장은 미국 정부의 행보가 어떻게 될지 물었다. 버시바우 대사는 상황이 매우 심각하다며 만일 일이 한국 측이 지향하는 바대로 일이 풀린다면 한미 FTA 협상을 예정대로 9월에 재개할 수 있을지 장담할 수 없다고 말했다. 최상의 경우로는 미국 정부가 쿠바 미사일 위기에 관한 그래함 앨리슨의 책에서 설명된 접근 방식을 따를 수 있다고 그는 말했다. 즉, 수용이 불가할 경우 마지막 전달된 메시지에 대응하지 말고 마지막 바로 전의 메지지에 대응하라. 즉, 단순히 새로운 제도의 규정이(약제비 적정화 방안) 한미 FTA 협상안에서 논의되어야 한다고 주장하는 것이다. 김현종은 앨리슨의 책을 읽었다고 말하면서, 그 대목을 이해한다고 했다. 만일 한국 정부가 동 초안을 실제 사전 공표했을 때 일이 틀어지게 되면, 미국 정부가 의약품/의료기기 작업반의 활동을 중단하거나, 한미 FTA 협상을 중단할 것으로 그는 이해하겠지만, 일이 그 지경이 되지 않길 바란다고 했다.

8. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 부정적 경과로 인해 미국 정부 내 일각에서 청와대가 공개적으로는 FTA를 원한다고 말하면서 실제로는 겁을 먹고 뒷걸음치기 시작하는 등 새 약제비 제도를 수단으로 미국에 비난을 전가하는 이중플레이로 이익을 챙기려는 속셈이 아닌지 의구심을 품을 수 있다고 말했다. 김 본부장은 공개 통화에서 노무현 대통령이 여전히 한미 FTA를 원한다고 말했다. 버시바우 대사는 한국 대통령의 다짐을 의심하지는 않지만, 최소한 노 대통령이 모든 부처를 장악하지는 않아 보인다고 말하였다. 김 본부장은 이의를 제기하며 장악 부분은 확인할 수 없지만, 버시바우 대사가 어떻게 해서 그런 인상을 받을 수 있었는지 이해할 수 있다고 말하였다.

===== 협상의 기본을 회복 =====

지난 7~8개월 동안을 돌아보면, 한국이 사실상 의약품에 관한 모든 약속에서 후퇴했는데 처음에는 약제비 급여 제도 변경을 "유보"하겠다고 협상 중에 약속했었다. 그렇다 하더라도, 과잉대응은 피해야 할 이유가 있다:
  * 시각적인 것부터 시작하면, 어떤 정치가도 "대형 제약회사"를 돕는 것처럼 보이는 걸 원하지 않는다. 더욱이, 미국 정부도 의료개혁이 한국의 고유 권한이고 현재의 약제비 급여 제도의 변화가 필요하다고 인정한 사항이다;

  * 둘째로, 한국 정부가 한미 FTA의 선결 조건으로 내세웠던 공약을 준수하지 않음으로써 "신의를 저버렸다"는 논쟁을 부추긴다면 한미 FTA 반대자들에 손에 놀아날 공산이 크다. 청와대는 한국이 한미 FTA 협상을 개시하기 위해 핵심 현안 문제에 대해 굴복했다는 혐의에 대해 공식적으로 대응해야 한다.
10. (기밀) 그와 동시에 현재 벌어진 상황에 대한 대응을 소홀히 하면 안 되는 이유도 있다. 임의적이고 불투명한 규제를 지향하는 이런 종류의 역행은 FTA로 인해 한국과의 교역에서 문제의 핵심인 비관세장벽을 잡을 수 있다는 희망이 줄어든다. 주기적으로 한국 정부는 의약품 문제에 유인 판매 상술을 활용하고 있다. 만일 우리가 이번에 의약품 분야를 용납한다면, 한국 정부는 다른 분야에 같은 전략을 시도할 수 있다고 판단할 것이다. 그런 가운데 미국 내 한미 FTA 핵심 지지층은 협정에 대해 반대로 돌아설 것이고, 아마도 의회의 거부권을 재촉할 가능성이 크다.

11. (기밀) 그러므로 미 대사관은 강력하되 점진적인 접근을 미국 정부에 권고한다. 
  * 첫째, 한미 FTA 취지에 맞는 유의미한 토론 없이 한국 정부가 약제비 급여 제도를 대폭 변경하는 일은 수용할 수 없다. 한국 정부는 약제비 문제가 우리 측에 대표적인 우려 사항임을 알지만, 그들이 실제 협상을 개시하기도 전에 반복적으로 규칙을 변경하고 있다.

  * 둘째, 미국 정부는 한미 FTA의 취지에 맞는 협상을 고수하고 있으며 한국 정부가 앞서 한 약속을 지키도록 할 작정임을 분명히 한다.

  * 이런 기준을 바탕으로 미국 정부는 8월 셋째 주나 넷째 주 중에 한미 FTA 의약품/의료기기 작업반 임시 회의를 상정해서 약제비 적정화 방안에 대한 미국 산업계와 미국 정부의 세부적인 우려 사항을 소상히 밝히는 제언을 준비할 예정이다. 미국은 포지티브 리스트 방식을 수용할 수 있지만, 제대로 할 필요가 있다.

  * 마지막으로 만일 한국이 협상을 거부한다면 3차 협상은 무기한 연기될 것이다. 9월 한미 정상회담에서 부시 대통령과 노 대통령은 한미 FTA 협상의 장래에 대해 논의할 수 있다.
12. (기밀) 우리는 한국 정부가 철회할 가능성을 높게 보지 않지만, 우리는 9월 한미 FTA 협상 일정을 취소하는 과격한 조치를 단행하기에 앞서 재고할 마지막 기회를 그들에게 주어야 한다고 믿는다. 우리는 의약품/의료기기 작업반 임시 회의를 상정(想定)해 미국의 종합적인 협상 입장을 마련하는 일이 중요함을 우리 미국 정부에 강조하고자 한다. 우리가 그들에게 여전히 약제비 개혁이 가능하고 동시에 우리가 우려하는 한미 FTA 문제를 해소할 수 있음을 보여줄 명확하고 합리적인 대안을 우리가 제시하지 않는 한 한국인들은 현재 입장을 변경하지 않을 것이다. 당신은 맨주먹으로 싸울 수는 없다.

13. (기밀) 우리는 우리 미국 정부의 반응과 지침을 고대한다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/3/06seoul2505|포와로 탐정의 번역]] (c) 무단 복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 바깥 고리 =====
  - [[:pharmaceuticals|한미 FTA 번역특선 의약품 및 의료기기]] //미 의회조사국 보고서//

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL2505.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 002505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/K AND EB/TPP 
NSC FOR TONG 
COMMERCE FOR 4431/MAC/IPB/EAP/DUTTON 
PASS USTR FOR CUTLER, BHATIA AND AUGEROT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/25/2016 
TAGS: ETRD KS
SUBJECT: PHARMACEUTICALS AND KORUS-FTA: TURNING THE TABLES 
 
REF: A. SEOUL 2421 
     ¶B. STATE 116991 
     ¶C. SEOUL 2210 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Alexander Vershbow. Reasons 1.4 (B,D & E) 
 
¶1. (C)  SUMMARY:  With public release of the draft 
implementing regulations for its Drug Expenditure 
Rationalization Plan (DERP) scheduled for July 26, the ROKG 
has slowly but steadily backed away from all the key 
commitments it made to us on treatment of pharmaceuticals in 
the FTA, and has now withdrawn its commitment to negotiate 
the terms of the new "positive list" system in the FTA 
Pharmaceuticals Working Group (ref a).  The 60-day comment 
period on the regs will start as of their public release July 
26, as promised; but the ROKG currently envisages this public 
comment period as ROKG-industry discussions, while 
characterizing any discussion within the FTA Pharma WG as an 
information exchange, rather than a negotiation.  The 
proposed pharma regs are a prime example of the kind or 
regulatory non-transparency that we have been seeking to 
reduce through the FTA, as non-tariff barriers (NTBs) 
restricting market access.  Because the ROKG's handling of 
the pharma issue in the FTA thus far raises concerns beyond 
this particular working group, post recommends a tough but 
graduated response: (1) to reject the ROKG's refusal to 
negotiate as unacceptable; (2) to insist on negotiations on 
the terms for authorization and reimbursement of 
pharmaceuticals under a positive list system; (3) to demand 
an extraordinary session of the FTA Pharmaceuticals Working 
Group in mid-to-late August, where the U.S. will present a 
comprehensive proposal; and (4) to postpone the Third Round 
of FTA talks if the ROKG refuses to negotiate in good faith. 
Details at para 11.  END SUMMARY. 
 
THE BACKGROUND:  THE ROKG RENEGES 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  As previewed in ref a discussions, on Monday July 
24 at 1900 local (0600 Washington time), MOFAT sent draft 
implementing regulations for the Drug Expenditure 
Rationalization Plan (DERP) via AmEmbassy Seoul and the 
Korean Embassy in Washington for transmittal to USG and U.S. 
interested parties.  The 26-page draft was provided in Korean 
only.  MOFAT did transmit two related English-language 
explanations of the proposed regulatory changes, and industry 
provided an English translation of the draft regs within 12 
hours.  However, regarding the original parameters for 
delivery of the documents as discussed with the ROKG (ref a), 
MHW plans to release the draft implementing regs Wednesday 
July 26, limiting the U.S. side's time to review and comment 
on the documents to one working day prior to release. 
Further, MOFAT conveyed that the 60-day official public 
comment period within Korea would start as of July 26, but 
that any discussion of the draft implementing regs in the FTA 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Working Group would be an 
information exchange, not negotiation of the details of the 
implementing regs.  Embassy learned that MHW briefed the 
Korean press on the draft implementing regs on July 24, while 
embargoing the news until their official release July 26.  As 
usual, the press embargo was not respected, and the story was 
out by mid-day July 25. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In July 24 meetings at the Blue House and with the 
ROK's chief FTA negotiator, the Ambassador and visiting 
Commerce U/S Frank Lavin pressed the case that the ROKG had 
promised us an opportunity for meaningful review of and 
comment on the draft implementing regs prior to their public 
release, as well as an opportunity to negotiate on the 
substance of the regs in the context of the FTA 
Pharmaceuticals/Medical Devices Working Group.  At the time 
the pharma WG talks were suspended during the FTA 
negotiations in Seoul two weeks ago, the USG offered to 
accept the positive list as a concept, in exchange for 
transparency in and dialogue on implementing the new 
approach.  It now appeared that the ROKG was backtracking on 
those commitments, the Ambassador and U/S Lavin made clear, 
and the USG would have to consider its response to these 
negative developments. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In response to the above, Blue House Senior 
Secretary for Economic Affairs Yoon Dae-hee confirmed that 
 
SIPDIS 
discussions within the ROKG on the draft implementing regs 
had continued throughout the weekend. But he admitted that 
one of the outcomes was that exchanges in the FTA Pharma/Med 
Devices WG would be information exchanges, not negotiations 
of the details of the regs.  Yoon pointed to Deputy 
PM/Finance Minister Kwon O-kyu as the Cabinet official 
coordinating the ROKG position on the release of the draft 
regs. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) ROK chief FTA negotiator Kim Jong-hoon expressed 
his discouragement with the outcome of ROKG interagency 
discussions, saying the things were not working out in the 
direction he and Trade Minister Kim Hyun-chong had desired. 
However, rather than focus on the procedural aspects of 
whether the ROKG had abided by its commitments, first for a 
standstill, then for transparency and dialogue, he instead 
repeated the ROKG's earlier request (ref c) that the U.S. 
side spell out its real problems with the substance of the 
positive list proposal.  He said he had never really 
understood what our issues were with the proposal itself, and 
further assured the Ambassador and U/S Lavin that the DERP 
would be non-discriminatory and scientifically-based. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Following the Yoon and Kim Jong-hoon meetings, Trade 
Minister Kim Hyun-chong phoned the Ambassador in the 
afternoon of July 24.  Kim said he had been "fighting like 
hell" on behalf of the parameters for release of the draft 
implementing regs to which the ROKG had committed (i.e., 
sharing them pre-release with the USG, allowing time for 
meaningful comment prior to their public release, starting 
the 60-day public comment period only with their release, and 
providing an opportunity for negotiation within the FTA 
Pharma/Med Devices WG).  Kim said that the July 21 Blue House 
meeting that discussed the process for releasing the draft 
regs had focused on the strongly adverse public reaction to 
press stories claiming that the ROKG had caved prior to the 
start of FTA talks by agreeing to the "four preconditions" 
(on autos, beef, pharma, and screen quotas).  An MBC TV 
program last week showed a USG official citing these four, 
Kim said, and this put the advocates of an FTA -- and him 
personally -- under pressure. 
 
¶7.  (C) Minister Kim asked what Washington was likely to do. 
The Ambassador said the situation was very serious, and that 
if things came out the way they were heading on the ROKG 
side, there was no guarantee the FTA talks would be able to 
resume as scheduled in September.  In the best case, he said, 
the USG might follow the approach described by Graham Allison 
in his book on the Cuban missile crisis, i.e. to respond not 
to the last message received, if unacceptable, but to the one 
before that -- i.e. to simply insist that the terms of the 
new system be negotiated in the FTA talks.  Kim said he had 
read Allison's book and understood the point.  If things were 
to go badly when the ROKG did pre-release the draft, he would 
understand if the USG suspended either the Pharma/Med Devices 
WG, or suspended the FTA talks altogether, but he hoped 
things wouldn't come to that. 
 
¶8.  (C) The Ambassador said that the negative developments 
might lead some in the USG to wonder whether the Blue House 
was playing a cynical game, professing publicly to want an 
FTA, but in reality getting cold feet and starting to back 
away, using the new pharmaceutical system as a means to shift 
the blame to the U.S.  Minister Kim, speaking on an open 
line, said that President Roh Moo-hyun still wants the FTA. 
The Ambassador said we did not doubt the ROK President's 
commitment but, at a minimum, President Roh does not appear 
to be in control of all his ministers.  Again, Minister Kim 
demurred, saying he couldn't confirm that, but he could 
understand how the Ambassador might have that impression. 
 
RESTORING THE BASIS FOR NEGOTIATIONS 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (C) Looking back over the past seven-eight months, it is 
undeniable that the Koreans have walked back virtually every 
commitment on pharmaceuticals, beginning with the promised 
"standstill" on changes to the pharma reimbursement system 
during the negotiations.  That being said, there are reasons 
to avoid overreacting: 
 
-- Starting with the optics, no politician wants to be seen 
helping "big pharma."  Further, even the USG has acknowledged 
that health care reform is a Korean prerogative and that the 
current reimbursement system needs change; 
 
-- Second, playing up the "bad faith" argument that the ROKG 
did not abide by the commitments it made as a precondition to 
FTA talks is likely to play into the hands of FTA opponents. 
The Blue House has had to respond publicly to allegations 
that Korea caved on key issues in order to launch FTA talks. 
¶10.  (C) At the same time, there are also reasons to avoid 
underreacting to what has happened.  Backward movement of 
this kind, in the direction of arbitrary and non-transparent 
regulation, lessens the hope that an FTA can get at the 
non-tariff barriers that figure so centrally in our trade 
problems with the ROK.  Procedurally, the ROKG has played 
bait-and-switch on the pharmaceuticals issue.   If we stand 
for this in pharmaceuticals, they may feel they can try the 
same tactics in other areas.  Meanwhile, a key U.S. 
constituency for the FTA will have turned against the 
agreement, likely precipitating its rejection by Congress. 
 
¶11. (C) Post therefore recommends Washington consider a tough 
but graduated approach. 
 
-- First, declare that the ROKG's handling of a major change 
to its pharmaceuticals reimbursement system, without 
meaningful discussion in the FTA context, is unacceptable. 
The ROKG knew this issue to be of major concern to us, yet 
they moved the goalposts repeatedly before real negotiations 
began. 
 
-- Second, make clear that the USG insists/insists on 
negotiations in the FTA context and intends to hold the ROKG 
to the commitments it made previously, before this week's 
walk-back. 
 
-- On this basis, the USG will prepare a proposal spelling 
out the detailed USG and U.S. industry concerns with the 
DERP, for an extraordinary meeting of the FTA Pharma and Med 
Devices WG during the third or fourth week of August.  The 
U.S. can accept a positive list approach, but it needs to be 
done right. 
 
-- Finally, if Korea refuses to negotiate, the third 
negotiating round will be postponed indefinitely.  At their 
September summit meeting, President Bush and President Roh 
can then discuss the future of the talks. 
 
¶12.  (C) We do not rate the odds of an ROKG climbdown as 
high, but we believe we should give them one last chance to 
reconsider before taking the dramatic step of canceling the 
September FTA round.  We would emphasize to Washington the 
importance of coming up with a comprehensive U.S. negotiating 
position for the extraordinary session of the working group. 
The Koreans will not alter their present course unless we 
present a clear and reasonable alternative that shows them 
they can still have reform and satisfy our concerns in the 
FTA.  You can't fight something with nothing. 
 
¶13.  (C) We look forward to Washington's reaction and 
guidance. 
 
 
 
VERSHBOW
</file>