^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3861  |  2006-11-09 01:30  |  기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PINR PREL ABLD KS KN }}  |
====== 제 목: 손학규 전 경기도지사, 북한 문제와 국내 정치 언급 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 003861 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))
국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 09/08/2016 
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PINR(([Intelligence])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), ABLD(([Buildings and Grounds])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)]))
제 목: 손학규 전 경기도지사, 북한 문제와 국내 정치 언급
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사.  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/12 01:32//

1. (기밀) 11월 3일 대사와 함께한 오찬에서 한나라당 대선 예비후보이며, 전 경기도지사를 역임한 손학규는 한미관계가 어디로 가고 있는지 진실을 캐기 위한 많은 질문을 요청하였고, 북한에 대한 자신의 견해, 그리고 한나라당 후보 경선 경쟁자들의 전략 해석을 비롯해 한국의 정국에 대한 평가를 제공하였다. 손학규는 한국민의 대다수가 한미동맹을 후원한다면서 한미동맹에 대한 명확한 의사를 표시하였고, 6자 회담 재계를 위한 미국의 노력에 대사에게 감사하였다. 현재 만끽하고 있는 경제적 번영과 평화에 크게 이바지한 미국에 대해 한국민은 감사한다고 손학규는 말하였다. 한국민은 차기 지도자로 개혁 성향의 보수 인사를 찾고 있다면서, 자신이 바로 그런 후보자라고 말하였다.

===== 북한 정책 =====

2. (기밀) 손학규는 7월부터 10월까지 100일 장정 중에, 북한의 도발 행위를 비난하는 세 번의 정치적인 성명을 한 바 있다. 손학규는 남북 경협과 교류를 통한 개혁 개방을 유도하는 목표와 함께하는 남북 관계를 지지한다고 말하였다. 그러나 최근 북한의 도발적인 행위를 볼 때 북한에 대한 선의를 계속 확대해야 한다고 생각하지 않는다. 한국은 북한에 단호히 맞서야 하며 북한의 핵실험에 분노를 표출해야 한다. 노무현 정부의 거부감 때문에, 한국은 미국과의 관계를 개선할 기회를 상실하였다. 미국은 한국이 북한 핵실험에 대응해 강력한 기조를 취하길 원하지만, 미국은 어떤 일을 하라고 한국에 말하지는 않는다고 버시바우 대사는 강조하였다.

3. (기밀) 10월 9일 핵실험에 대한 한국정부의 형편없는 대응 때문에, 한국이 일부 미국의 신임을 잃었다고 손학규는 걱정하였다. 그는 북한과 관련해 한국이 세 가지 원칙을 따라야 한다고 내세웠다: 첫째, 한국은 핵보유국 북한을 용인할 수 없다; 둘째, 만일 북한이 책임 있게 행동한다면, 북한은 원조로 보상받아야만 하며, 만일 무책임하게 행동한다면 응당한 결과가 있을 것이다; 셋째, 미국과 국제사회와의 긴밀한 협력이 다른 무엇보다 중요하다.

===== 포용정책: 논쟁? =====
 
4. (기밀) 손학규는 지금이 햇볕정책의 장단점과 포용정책을 실행하기 위한 최상의 방법에 대해 토의할 시점이라고 수긍하였다. 그는 김대중 전 대통령이 지속적인 대북 포용정책을 찬성하는 발언을 하지 않았으면 했다고 말했다. 대신에 북한의 핵실험에 대해 공개적으로 강하게 반대했어야만 했다. 만일 한국의 확고한 대응이 있었다면, 나중에 포용정책으로 되돌아가더라도 말이 된다. 모든 경우에 개혁과 개방을 장려하는 대북 관계라는 목표를 정의하는 게 중요하다. 대사는 올해 초 김 전 대통령과 회동했으며, 김대중의 비공개 발언은 일부 공개적 발언보다는 더 합리적이었다고 지적하였다.

===== 내각개편 =====
5. (기밀) 대사는 새 통일부 장관 내정자인 이재정이 대북 정책의 변화를 제기할지 손학규에게 물었다. 손학규는 이재정은 통일 문제에 관한 특별한 지식이 없으며, 이재정은 “전문가가 아니다”며 이제 통일부는 정책 과정에서 덜 중요한 역할을 할 거라고 했다. 손학규는 그 뒤 송민순 외교통상부 장관 내정자에 대해 어떻게 생각하느냐고 대사에게 물었다. 송민순은 통일외교안보수석으로 가지 전에는 경기도에서 손학규의 외교정책참모였다고 손학규는 언급하였다. 송민순은 통일외교안보수석으로서, 6자 회담 대표로서 많은 좋은 일을 했다고 대사는 말했다. 그러나 송민순이 일부 공개 석상 발언을 더욱 신중히 한다면 득이 될 수 있다고 했다((번역 주: 무슨 발언?[[06seoul3922#밝은_미래에_대한_조명|제 목: 에이펙 정상회의에서의 한미 장관급 회담을 위한 무대연출]])). 새 내각이 들어서면서 주요 현안은 만일 노무현이 국제협력보다는 계속해서 남북관계에 높은 우선순위를 둘지 여부이며, 그렇게 되면 한국의 외교 실패가 계속 늘어날 거라고 손학규는 말하였다.

===== 6자 회담 =====

6. (기밀) 대사는 양자 회담과 비교해 6자 회담의 이점을 설명하면서, 당사국들이 다른 형태의 대북 지렛대를 형성하고 있다고 했다. 북한 핵실험 뒤끝에 가장 중요한 일은 일부 조기 조치를 통해 북한이 자체 핵 사업을 해체할 준비가 되어 있음을 보여주는 것이다. 다음 6자 회담은 말 잔치로 끝날 수 없으며, 반드시 결과물이 있어야만 한다.

7. (기밀) 손학규는 미국이 북한의 핵 프로그램 제거보다 북한의 핵 기술의 확산을 더 걱정하는지 물었다. 대사는 미국은 핵확산과 북한의 핵 프로그램 해체에 대해 똑같이 걱정하고 있다고 말하였다. 만일 북한이 핵 사업을 해체한다면, 북한은 핵확산을 할 수 없게 된다. 손학규의 말에 따르면, 1994년 북미 기본합의서에 문제가 있는데, 그 이유는 특정 지역에만 조사관이 허용되고 있는 관계로 북한은 단순하게 핵 프로그램을 다른 지역에서 개발하였다. 대사는 북미 기본합의서에 따른 제한적 핵 사찰이라는 성격이 주요한 결함 중의 하나라고 동의하였다. 이번에는 그러한 속임수가 재발할 수 없도록 전국적인 사찰 개방이 필요하다. 만일 북한이 조기에 사찰요원을 허용하는 약정이 없다면, 우리는 북한이 핵 프로그램 해체에 대해 심각히 고려하지 않고 있음을 알게 될 것이다.

===== 미국정부의 “진짜 목표” =====

8. (기밀) 북한의 핵실험에 대한 대응으로 미국 정부가 한국 정부에 기대하는 것이 무엇이냐고 물었다. 버시바우 대사는 우리는 특정한 요구가 있는 게 아니지만, 가까운 동맹국에 걸맞게 한국이 분명하고 강력한 방식으로 대응하길 희망한다. 개성공업지구나 금강산 사업이 계속될지라도, 한국 정부는 북한 정권의 대량살상무기 사업을 이롭게 할 수 있는 돈줄을 제한하는 조정을 함으로써 북한에 강력한 신호를 보낼 것이다.

===== 유엔안보리결의안 1718호 어떤 의미가 있나? =====

9. (기밀) 손학규는 금강산보다는 개성공단을 선호한다는 힐 차관보의 발언에 어떤 의미가 있는지 물었다. 대사는 힐 차관보의 개인적인 발언은 개성공단은 북한 근로자가 자본주의에 노출됨으로써 북한 내부에 변화를 촉진하는 수단을 대변하지만, 반면에 금강산 사업은 거의 탈바꿈 효과가 없다는 많은 사람의 견해를 반영한다고 대답하였다.

===== 대량살상무기 확산방지구상에 대한 혼선 =====

10. (기밀) 대사는 PSI에 대한 손학규의 질의에 응답하길, PSI 참여는 어떠한 특정 행동을 요하지 않으며, 각국은 자체 참여 범위를 선택할 수 있다고 했다. PSI는 일부 한국 비평가들이 주장하듯 해상 전쟁과 동일하지 않다. 게다가 PSI는 국내 및 국제법에 바탕을 두고 있다. 한국은 PSI 차단 원칙을 승인함으로써 전면적인 참여국이 될 수 있지만, 해상 차단을 꺼리고 있다. 만일 한국이 전면적인 참여를 결정하지 않는다면, 계속 참관자가 될 수 있다.

===== 북한의 미래 =====

11. (기밀) 북한의 미래에 관한 가장 중요한 고려 사항은 북한 정권에 대한 지속적인 지원을 중국이 희망하느냐 여부라고 손학규는 말하였다. 일부 전문가들은 중국이 김정일 정권을 유지하길 원하고 있지만, 북한 내부의 변혁은 쿠데타나 정권 붕괴를 통해 이루어질 거라고 말한다. 버시바우 대사는 어느 시점에 북한이 과도한 짐이 되고 있다고 판단하고 북한의 내부 변화를 초래하기 위한 일을 시작하길 바란다고 말하였다. 손학규는 박관용 전 국회의장이 통일은 북한의 갑작스러운 붕괴 이후에 산사태처럼 올 수 있다고 그에게 말했다고 했다. 손학규는 많은 전문가가 가면 갈수록 그런 견해를 밝히고 있다고 했다. 경착륙이 바람직하지만, 북한의 붕괴도 고려해야 한다고 두 사람은 견해를 같이하였다.

12. (기밀) 부시 대통령은 북한 주민들의 고통에 대해 고심하고 있다고 대사는 말하였다. 부시 대통령은 6자 회담이 북한의 내부 변화와 개혁을 장려하는 데 활용되길 원한다. 문제는 북한의 내부 변화가 정권 교체와는 다른 것임을 북한 지도자에게 이해시키는 일이다. 

===== 간첩 스캔들 =====

13. (기밀) 국내 정치로 돌아와 재미교포 한 명과 공모해 대남 간첩 활동을 한 협의로 5명의 운동권 학생을 최근에 체포된 일은 심각한 사안이라고 손학규는 말하였다. 그는 일부 좌파는 단순한 국가보안법 위반으로 보고 있지만, 다른 사람들은 체포된 전직 운동권이 실상 북한에 협력한 간첩이라고 주장하고 있다고 말했다. 손학규는 전 국정원장 김승규는 독립적으로 직무를 수행하였고, 간첩 사건을 추구했기 때문에 강제로 직위 해제되었다는 느낌이라고 말하였다.

===== 정계 개편 =====

14. (기밀) 손학규는 새로운 중도 개혁 정당을 만들겠다는 고건 전 총리의 11월 1일 계획 발표에 대해 한나라당의 지지는 전혀 못 받을 것이며, 또한 새 정당에 대한 전반적인 전망도 밝지 않다고 말하였다. 그는 일부 열린우리당 의원들이 한나라당으로 넘어가길 원하지만 어려울 거라고 말하였다. 그는 2007년 초에는 많은 정치적인 격변을 예상한다고 말하였다. “게임”은 1월에 본격적으로 시작해서 2007년 대선전까지 많은 움직임이 예고된다.

15. (기밀) 이명박 전 서울 시장에 대한 한나라당 내 지지가 커지고 있다고 손학규는 말하였다. 손학규는 박근혜가 한나라당의 대권 후보가 될 기회에 대해 낙관하지 않았다. 박근혜는 지도자로서 당내 강력한 지도력을 보여왔지만, 국가 지도자로 여겨지지 않는다. 그는 북한과 같은 예민한 쟁점은 멀리하는 게 이명박의 전략이라며, 대중적 지지를 쌓는 데 집중하고 있다.

===== 한미 관계 =====

16. (기밀) 한미 관계와 관련해 손학규는 한국정부 내 많은 이들이 민족 자결권을 강조하며, 독립의 상징으로 미국으로부터 전작권을 환수하길 원하고 있다고 우려를 표명하였다. 손학규는 이런 추세는 미국 내 한국 지지를 잠식한다며 걱정된다면서, 한국이 “홀로서기”를 원한다는 미국의 인식을 바꾸려면 한국이 무엇을 해야만 할지 물었다. 버시바우 대사는 한국에 가장 기본적인 지적을 하자면 한국은 특정 사안에 대해 논쟁을 하더라도, 근본 원칙에 대해 견해를 같이하며, 핵심 사안에 대해 행동을 통일한다는 생각으로 진정한 동맹국같이 행동해야만 한다고 말하였다. 중차대한 시기에 연대가 신뢰를 쌓는 열쇠다. 이제 전작권 이양과 함께 한층 균형 잡힌 동반자 관계가 되었기 때문에, 관심의 초점은 전작권 이양을 해야 하는가가 아닌 안전한 전작권 이양에 집중되어야만 한다.

===== 한중 관계 =====

17. (기밀) 손학규는 한중 관계가 10월 9일 핵실험으로 달라졌는지 물었다. 버시바우 대사는 7월 5일 미사일 발사 이래로 특히 중국이 형세 역전을 위해 북한에 영향력 행사를 모색하고 있다고 말하였다. 미중관계는 중국의 역할 확대의 결과로 더욱 강하게 성장하였다. 또한, 중국이 편의를 제공한 최근 6자 회담 재계에 대한 합의는 미국이 볼 때 6자 회담 개념의 효용성을 입증 시켜주었다.

===== 손학규의 서던캘리포니아대학과 워싱턴 방문 =====

18. (기밀) 손학규는 12월에 서던캘리포니아대학에서 강연해야 할지, 그 뒤 워싱턴을 방문하기 위해 미국에 가야 할지 대사의 의견을 구했다. 한미관계의 상태에 대해 환담을 하고, 또한 미국에서 어떻게 한국을 바라보는지 배울 기회로써 손학규의 방문을 대사는 지지하였다. 또한, 미국인들에게는 대선 캠페인에 앞서 2007년 대통령 후보 중 한 사람을 알도록 해주는 기회도 된다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3861|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 참조 내부 고리 =====
  - [[06seoul3922#밝은_미래에_대한_조명|제 목: 에이펙 정상회의에서의 한미 장관급 회담을 위한 무대연출]] //대사가 주의하라는 송민순의 발언은?//
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL3861.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2016 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PINR [Intelligence], PREL [External Political Relations], ABLD [Buildings and Grounds], KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)] 
SUBJECT: FORMER GYEONGGI GOVERNOR SOHN HAK-KYU ON NORTH 
KOREA AND DOMESTIC POLITICS 
 
 
Classified By: Amb. Alexander Vershbow.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Over lunch with the Ambassador on November 3, GNP 
Presidential hopeful and former Gyeonggi Province Governor 
Sohn Hak-kyu asked many probing questions about where 
U.S.-ROK relations were headed and offered his views on North 
Korea and his assessment of the ROK political scene, 
including his interpretation of the strategies of his 
competitors in the race to obtain the GNP's candidacy.  Sohn 
gave a clear indication of his support for the U.S.-ROK 
alliance, stating that the majority of Koreans were behind 
the alliance and thanked the Ambassador for U.S. efforts to 
restart the Six Party Talks.  He said the Korean people 
appreciated how much the U.S. had done for the peace and 
economic prosperity they now enjoy.  Sohn said he thought 
Koreans were looking for a reform-minded conservative as 
their next leader and suggested he was just such a candidate. 
 
 
NORTH KOREA POLICY 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  (C) During Sohn's 100-day tour of Korea from July to 
October, Sohn made three political statements condemning 
provocative acts by North Korea.  Sohn said he supported 
engagement with the North with the goal of inducing reform 
and openness through exchanges and economic interaction.  He 
did not, however, think that the ROK should continue to 
extend goodwill to the North in light of their recent 
provocative acts.  The ROK should stand firmly against the 
North and express anger at the DPRK's nuclear test.  He 
regretted that because of the Roh administration's 
reluctance, the ROK had lost an opportunity to improve 
relations with the U.S.  The Ambassador said the U.S. wanted 
the ROK to take a strong stance in response to the nuclear 
test, but emphasized that the U.S. was not telling the ROK 
what to do. 
 
¶3.  (C) Because of the poor response by the ROKG to the 
October 9 nuclear test, Sohn was worried that the ROK had 
lost some of the trust of the U.S.  He outlined the three 
principles he thought the ROK should follow regarding North 
Korea: first, the ROK cannot accept a nuclear North Korea; 
second, if North Korea acts responsibly, they should be 
rewarded with aid, and if they act irresponsibly, there 
should be consequences; third, close cooperation with the 
U.S. and the international community should be paramount. 
 
ENGAGEMENT: DEBATE? 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Sohn agreed that now was the time to debate the 
merits of the Sunshine Policy and the best way to conduct an 
engagement policy.  He said he wished former President Kim 
Dae-jung had not recently spoken out in favor of continued 
engagement with the North.  Instead, Kim should have come out 
strongly against the nuclear test by the North.  If there 
were a firm response from the ROK, then moving back to 
engagement later would make sense.  In all cases, it was 
important to define the purpose of any engagement with the 
North to encourage reforms and openness.  The Ambassador 
noted he had met earlier in the year with former President 
Kim and Kim's private statements were more reasonable than 
some of his public statements. 
 
NEW CABINET 
----------- 
 
¶5.  (C) The Ambassador asked Sohn if he thought the new 
Unification Minister designate, Lee Jae-jeong, would 
institute a change in policy toward North Korea.  Sohn said 
Lee Jae-jeong had no special knowledge about unification 
issues and that Lee was "not a professional," and added that 
now MOU would play a less important role in the policy 
process.  Sohn then asked the Ambassador what he thought of 
Song Min-soon as the Foreign Minister-designate.  He 
mentioned that Song, before going to the NSC, was Sohn's 
foreign policy advisor in Gyeonggi Province.  The Ambassador 
said Song had done many good things as National Security 
Advisor and previously as the Six Party Talks representative, 
but noted Song could benefit from being more careful about 
some of his public statements.  With the new cabinet coming 
 
in, Sohn said the main issue was that if Roh continued to 
attach a higher priority to North-South relations than to 
international cooperation, ROK diplomatic failures would 
continue to mount. 
 
SIX PARTY TALKS 
--------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) The Ambassador explained the advantages of the Six 
Party Talks in comparison with bilateral talks, noting that 
each party had different forms of leverage vis-a-vis North 
Korea.  The most important thing in the wake of the nuclear 
test was for North Korea to show through some early measures 
that it was ready to dismantle its nuclear program.  The next 
round of the Six Party talks could not just be talk - there 
must be results. 
 
¶7.  (C) Sohn asked if the U.S. was more concerned with the 
proliferation of the North's nuclear technology than with 
eliminating its nuclear programs.  The Ambassador said that 
the U.S. was equally concerned with stopping proliferation 
and dismantling the North's nuclear program. If the North 
dismantled its program, it would not be able to proliferate. 
There was a problem with the 1994 Agreed Framework, according 
to Sohn, since inspectors were only allowed into certain 
areas so the North simply developed their nuclear program in 
other places.  The Ambassador agreed that the limited nature 
of the inspections under the Agreed Framework was one of its 
major flaws.  This time, the North needed to open up for 
nation-wide inspections to assure the world that such 
deception could not occur again.  If there are no early 
commitments by the North to allow inspections, we will know 
they are not serious about dismantlement. 
 
THE "REAL TARGET" OF THE USG 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Sohn asked what the USG expected out of the ROKG in 
response to the DPRK's nuclear test.  The Ambassador said we 
did not have specific demands but hoped that the ROK would 
decide to respond in a clear and strong manner, befitting a 
close ally.  Even if the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC) and 
Mt. Kumgang projects continued, the ROKG could make 
adjustments to limit cash flows to the DPRK regime that could 
benefit its WMD programs, thereby sending a strong signal to 
the North. 
 
UNSCR 1718-WHAT DOES IT MEAN? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) Sohn asked if there was any meaning to A/S Hill's 
statements that he preferred KIC to Mt. Kumgang.  The 
Ambassador replied that A/S Hill's personal statements 
reflected the views of many who thought that KIC represented 
a means to promote internal change in the DPRK by exposing 
North Korean workers to capitalism, whereas Kumgang had 
little transformational effect. 
 
PSI CONFUSION 
------------- 
 
¶10.  (C) The Ambassador responded to Sohn's inquiry about PSI 
and said that participation in PSI did not require any 
specific actions -- each country could choose the scope of 
its involvement.  PSI clearly did not equal war at sea as 
some Korean critics claimed.  In addition, PSI was based on 
national and international law.  The ROK could become a full 
participant by endorsing the PSI principles, but refrain from 
maritime interdictions.  If the ROK decided not to 
participate fully, it could continue to be an observer. 
 
FUTURE OF NORTH KOREA 
--------------------- 
 
¶11.  (C) Sohn said the most important factor for the future 
of North Korea was the desire of China to continue to support 
the regime.  Some experts say that even though China wants to 
maintain the KJI regime, transformation from within may occur 
either through a coup d'etat or collapse.  The Ambassador 
said he hoped that at some point China decided that North 
Korea was becoming an excessive burden and would start to 
work to effect internal change.  Sohn said that former 
 
speaker of the Assembly Park Kwan-youn had told him that 
unification may come as a landslide after a sudden collapse 
in the North.  He said many experts were expressing this view 
more and more.  While a soft landing was preferable, collapse 
of the North had to be considered, the two agreed. 
 
¶12.  (C) President Bush cares deeply about the suffering of 
the North Korean people, the Ambassador said.  The President 
wanted to use the Six Party Talks to encourage internal 
change and reform in the North.  The challenge was to 
convince DPRK leaders that internal change was not the same 
thing as regime change. 
 
SPY SCANDAL 
----------- 
 
¶13.  (C) Turning to domestic politics, Sohn said that the 
recent arrest of five former student activists for suspected 
collaboration with a Korean-American spying for the North was 
a serious issue.  He said that some on the left viewed the 
arrests as simple violations of the National Security Law 
while others claimed the detained former activists were, in 
fact, spies working for the North.  Sohn said he felt that 
the former NIS Director Kim Seung-kyu operated independently 
and was forced out of his position due to his pursuit of the 
spy case. 
 
PARTY SHAKE-UP 
-------------- 
 
¶14.  (C) Sohn said that former PM Goh Kun's November 1 
announcement of plans to form a new, centrist reform party 
would receive zero support from the Grand National Party 
(GNP) and the overall prospects for the new party were dim. 
He said that while some Uri Party members wanted to switch to 
the GNP, it would be difficult.  He said he expected lots of 
political turmoil and change in early 2007.  In January, the 
"game" would start in earnest and lots of moves remained 
until the December 2007 presidential election. 
 
¶15.  (C) In the GNP, Sohn said, support for former Seoul 
Mayor Lee Myung-bak within the party was growing.  Sohn was 
not optimistic about Park Geun-hye's chances to obtain the 
GNP nomination.  Park had shown strong leadership as party 
leader, but was not seen as a national leader.  He said Lee's 
strategy was to stay away from delicate issues such as North 
Korea and focus on building popular support. 
 
U.S.-ROK RELATIONSHIP 
--------------------- 
 
¶16.  (C) On the U.S.-ROK relationship, Sohn expressed concern 
that there were many in the ROKG who were emphasizing 
self-determination and that they wanted to take back OPCON 
from the U.S. as a sign of independence.  Sohn said he was 
worried that this trend was eroding support for the ROK in 
the U.S. and asked what the ROK should do to change the 
perception that it wanted to "go it alone."  The Ambassador 
said the most basic point was that the ROK should act like a 
real ally in the sense that, while we may argue over specific 
issues, we agree on fundamental principles and act in concert 
at key points, such as after the North Korea nuclear test. 
Solidarity in crucial times was the key to building trust. 
Now, as the alliance becomes a more balanced partnership with 
the transfer of OPCON, the focus should be on the safe 
transfer of OPCON rather than on whether the transfer should 
occur. 
 
U.S.-PRC RELATIONS 
------------------ 
 
¶17.  (C) Sohn asked if U.S.-PRC relations had changed as a 
result of the October 9 nuclear test.  The Ambassador said 
that particularly since the July 5 missile launch China has 
exercised greater responsibility in seeking to influence 
North Korea to reverse course.  The U.S.-PRC relationship has 
grown stronger as a result of the PRC's expanded role.  Also, 
the recent agreement facilitated by China to resume the 
negotiations has validated the concept of Six Party Talks, in 
our view. 
 
SOHN VISIT TO USC, WASHINGTON 
 
----------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (C) Sohn asked the Ambassador for his opinion on whether 
he should go to the United States to give a lecture at USC in 
December and then go on to Washington.  The Ambassador 
supported a visit as an opportunity for Sohn to talk about 
the state of the U.S.-ROK relationship and learn how Korea is 
seen in the U.S.  It's also a chance for Americans to get to 
know one of the 2007 presidential candidates in advance of 
the campaign. 
VERSHBOW
</file>