^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3999  |  2006-11-20 06:16  |  기밀  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PREL KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 강재섭 한나라당 대표 작전통제권 발언 해명 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 003999 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))
국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 12/10/2014 
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), KS(([Korea (South)])) 
제 목: 강재섭 한나라당 대표 작전통제권 발언 해명
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사  근거 1.4 (b,d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/06 21:24//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 강재섭 한나라당 야당 대표의 11월 8일 국회 연설에 대해서 논의하기 위하여 11월 16일 강 대표와 회동하였다. 동 연설은 전시 작전 통제권 한국 이양에 비판적인 내용이다. 비록 강재섭은 작전통제권 이양에 대해 원칙적인 지지를 유지하고 있다고 해명하였지만, 그는 북한의 위협이 줄어들기 전까지는 이양 시기가 더 늦춰져야 한다고 주장하였다. 버시바우 대사는 전작권 이양 자체의 일반 원칙과 전작권 이양 시기에 대한 유보적 견해를 구분해야만 한다고 제안하였다. 작전통제권 이양에 반대 로비하기 위해 워싱턴을 방문할 한나라당 대표단 중의 한 명인 정형근 의원도 역시 회동에 참석하였다. 요점 끝.

===== 작전통제권 이양 =====

2. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 한국민이 전작권 사안에 대해 한나라당과 미국 정부 사이에 이견이 있다고 간주하지 않을지 우려를 표명하였다. 한국의 군사력과 한층 균형 잡인 한미 관계를 찬성하는 여론을 고려할 때, 작전통제권 이양은 한미동맹이 한 걸음 나아가는 자연스러운 일이다. 남한 사람들이 북한을 우려하는 일은 합당하지만, 한국의 군사력에 더해 위기 시에 미군의 지원이 보장되므로 이 시점에서 작전통제권 이양을 심각히 고려할만한 여력이 생겼다. 작전통제권 이양의 속도 조절을 요청하고 있는 한국민에 대한 화답으로 양국 국방장관이 최근 2009년 10월 안보협의회의에서 2012년 4월 시간표에 합의하면서 미국은 매우 유연하게 대처하였다.

3. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 한나라당이 전작권 이양 시기와 전작권 이양 원칙을 분명하게 분리한다면 미국 정부 내부와 한국 대중의 혼란을 줄이게 될 거라고 제안하였다. 한국민은 작전통제권 이양이 진정 자연스럽고 이익이 된다는 자각에 이르게 되었기 때문에, 한나라당이 전작권 사안에 대해 선명히 한다면 당력에 이로울 것이다. 버시바우 대사는 비록 정확한 이양 시기에 대한 논란이 있지만, 한나라당 의원들은 작전통제권 이양 원칙은 분명히 지지하는 걸로 본다고 했다.

4. (기밀) 강재섭은 대사의 우려에 대해 응하길, 전작권 문제에 대한 이견이 있다고 생각하지 않는다고 말하였다. 전작권 이양 원칙을 지지하지만, 작전통제권이 주권 문제라고 말하면서 국민을 호도하려는 노 대통령에 동의하지 않는다고 그는 말하였다. 강재섭은 두 가지 지적과 함께 본인의 입장을 더 분명히 밝혔다. 첫째, 작전통제권은 한반도에 평화가 뿌리내리기 전까지는 이양되어서는 안 된다. 둘째, 북한의 핵실험 이후 한국의 평화는 합의 형성 과정을 통해 반드시 재정립되어야만 한다. 그는 한국민의 60%가 전작권 이양에 찬성하고 30%는 반대하는 걸로 나온 2006년 10월 초 여론조사를 언급하였다. 가장 최근 여론 조사에서는 단지 30%만이 작전통제권 이양을 지지하는 걸로 나왔다며, 한국민은 노무현에 대한 믿음을 더욱 상실했고, 북한 핵 실험 이후에 국민의 불안감이 커졌음을 보여준다.

5. (기밀) 강재섭은 우선은 작전통제권 이양을 고려하기에 앞서 북한의 여러 핵 시설이 해체되는 모습을 보고 싶다고 했다. 작전통제권 이양에 따라 요구되듯이, 만일 북한이 연합사령부가 해체되었다는 소식을 듣게 된다면, 북한의 승리로 인식될 것이다. 오늘날과 같은 상황에서는 한국민이 메시지를 이해하도록 매우 단순한 용어로 말할 필요가 있다고 강재섭은 말하였다. 만일 미국이 한국에서 미군을 철수하게 된다면, 역내 중국의 영향력은 견제를 받지 않고, 북한의 행동은 수용 범위를 넘나들게 될 것이다.

6. (기밀) 강재섭은 정치적인 이득을 위해서 작전통제권 이양에 반대 목소리를 내는 게 아니라고 설명하였다. 오히려, 자신은 국가 안보와 역내 안정을 우려했기 때문에 서울 시청에서 벌어진 전작권 이양 반대 시위에 참석하였고, 한국민이 금강산 여행을 하지 말아야 한다고 말하였다. 한나라당 동료인 정형근은 전작권 이양 움직임의 배경에 진정 군사적 당위성이 있는 것인지 그게 아니라 한국 내 알려진 반미주의에 대한 정치적 비용인지 물었다.

7. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 전작권 이양 결정상에 정치적 고려는 작은 부분에 불과하다고 말하였다; 군사적 이유가 총체적인 당위성을 제공한다. 벨 사령관과 다른 미군 지휘관들은 한국이 자국 부대의 전작권을 보유하지 않는 건 비정상이라고 확신하고 있다. 한국에서 미군이 장기적으로 환영받도록 담보하기 위해선 작전통제권 이양은 긍정적인 추이라고 대사는 말하였다. 연합사령부를 대체하기 위해 마련된 지휘 구조는 현 시스템만큼 강하거나 더 강할 수 있다. 그렇게 한국의 퇴임 장성마저도 연례 “평화” 연습 중에 지적한 바 있다. 시간이 지나면 주권 논쟁은 차치하더라도 (대사도 허울만 그렇듯 하다고 동의하였다), 많은 한국인은 한국 군대를 한국 장성의 지휘 아래 두길 선호할 것이다.

===== 대량살상무기 확산방지구상에 대한 지지 =====

8. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 한국이 대량살상무기 확산방지구상을(이하 PSI) 전면 가입하지 않기로 한 결정에 미국이 실망했다고 확인해 주었다. 한국 정부와 한나라당을 비롯한 남한 정치가들은 PSI가 무엇인지, 또한 PSI가 아닌 것은 무엇인지 한국민에게 적절하게 설명하지 못하였다. 미국 정부는 한국이 PSI의 전면 지지를 고려하길 여전히 희망하고 있다. 그러나 우리는 한국의 선택적인 PSI 참여를 환영한다. 비록 한국 국민 사이에 큰 관심은 없었지만, 한나라당은 PSI 지원을 위해서 많은 정치적 자산을 들여왔다고 강재섭은 말하였다.

===== 6자 회담 =====

9. (기밀) 강재섭은 미국이 단순히 북한을 협상 테이블로 복귀한 점에 만족하고, 북미 간 방코델타아시아 사안을 논의하기로 합의해 양보했다고 우려를 표명하자, 대사는 견해를 달리하였다. 버시바우 대사는 미국은 조기 핵 폐기, 핵 시설 철거, 국제 원자력 기구 사찰 요원의 현장 복귀 등 구체적인 행동을 요구했으며 생각이 확고했다고 강조했다. 버시바우 대사는 대화 재개는 특히 유엔안보리 결의안을 통한 여러 국가의 압력의 산물이라고 말하였다. 미국은 언제든 6자 회담의 틀에서 방코델타아시아 사안을 논의할 준비가 되어 있다; 그것은 양보가 아니다. 방코델타아시아 해결이 어떠하든 북한이 불법적인 활동을 줄일 필요가 있다고 대사는 말하였다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3999|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL3999.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003999 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PREL [External Political Relations], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION CHAIRMAIN CLARIFIES OPCON REMARKS 
 
Classified By: Amb. Alexander Vershbow.  Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) The Ambassador met with opposition GNP Chairman Kang 
Jae-sup on November 16 to discuss Kang's November 8 address 
to the National Assembly which was critical of the transfer 
of Wartime Operational Control (OPCON) to the ROK.  Although 
Kang clarified that he remained supportive of the principle 
behind the OPCON transfer, he asserted that the timing should 
be further delayed until the North Korean threat had receded. 
 The Ambassador suggested that the GNP should distinguish 
their reservations with the timing of OPCON transfer from the 
general principle of the transfer itself.  Representative 
Chung Hyung-keun who was a member of a GNP delegation that 
went to Washington to lobby against the OPCON transfer also 
attended the meeting.  END SUMMARY. 
 
OPCON TRANSFER 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) The Ambassador expressed concern that the Korean 
public may perceive a divide between the GNP's views and 
those of the USG on the OPCON issue.  Given the ROK's 
military strength and the public opinion in favor of a more 
balanced U.S.-ROK partnership, OPCON transfer was a natural 
step in the progression of the U.S.-ROK alliance.  Even 
though North Korea was a legitimate concern to the South 
Koreans, the strength of the ROK military and the guarantee 
of U.S. military support in time of crisis allowed for the 
issue of OPCON transfer to be seriously considered at this 
time.  In a nod to the Korean public who have been calling 
for a slower pace for OPCON transfer, the U.S. was very 
flexible at the recent SCM meetings, where the two Defense 
Ministers agreed on the October 2009 to March 2012 timeframe. 
 
¶3.  (C) The Ambassador suggested that the GNP would cause 
less confusion in the public and within the USG if it clearly 
separated the principle of OPCON transfer from the timing of 
the transfer.  As the Korean public came closer to the 
realization that OPCON transfer was indeed natural and 
beneficial, the GNP's clarity on the issue would be useful 
for the party's strength.  The Ambassador suggested that GNP 
legislators consider supporting clearly the principle of 
OPCON transfer, even if there was lingering debate about the 
exact timing. 
 
¶4.  (C) In response to the Ambassador's concerns, Kang said 
that he did not think there was a difference of opinion on 
the matter.  While supporting the principle of OPCON 
transfer, Kang said he did not agree with President Roh's 
efforts to mislead the people by saying OPCON was a 
sovereignty issue.  Kang further clarified his position with 
two points.  First, that OPCON should not be transferred 
until peace had again taken root on the Peninsula.  Second, 
following the DPRK nuclear test, peace in Korea must be 
reestablished through consensus-building.  He cited polling 
statistics from early October 2006 in which 60 percent of the 
Korean people were in favor of OPCON transfer and 30 percent 
were opposed.  The latest poll statistics, in which support 
for OPCON transfer was only 30 percent, showed that the 
public had further lost faith in Roh and their sense of 
insecurity had risen following the DPRK nuclear test. 
 
¶5.  (C) Kang suggested that he would first like to see North 
Korea dismantle its nuclear facilities before considering the 
OPCON issue again.  If the North heard that the Combined 
Forces Command (CFC) was dismantled, as called for under 
OPCON transfer, it would be perceived as a win for the North. 
 In today's environment, it was necessary to speak in very 
simple terms for the Korean people to get the message, Kang 
said.  If the U.S. were to withdraw its troops from Korea, 
China's influence in the region would be unchecked and North 
Korea would continue to push the boundaries of unacceptable 
behavior. 
 
¶6.  (C) Kang explained that he was not speaking out against 
OPCON transfer for political gain.  Rather, he was concerned 
with national security and regional stability, which was why 
he participated in a demonstration against OPCON transfer at 
City Hall and told Koreans they should not travel to Kumgang 
Mountain.  GNP colleague Chung Hyung-keun inquired as to the 
motivation behind OPCON transfer and whether there was truly 
a military justification for the move or whether it was 
political price for the perceived anti-Americanism in Korea. 
 
¶7.  (C) The Ambassador said that political concerns played 
only a small part in the decision; military rationale 
provided the overarching justification.  General Bell and 
other U.S. military leaders strongly believed that it was 
unnatural for Korea not to assume wartime control of its 
troops.  To guarantee that U.S. troops would be welcomed in 
Korea in the long term, OPCON transfer was a positive 
development, the Ambassador said.  The structures put in 
place to replace CFC could be as strong or stronger than the 
current system, a point that even retired Korean generals 
have expressed in recent weeks during the annual "Pyoungwa" 
exercise.  Over time, putting the sovereignty argument aside, 
(which he agreed was specious), many Koreans would prefer 
that their troops fall under the command of their generals in 
time of war. 
 
SUPPORT FOR PSI 
--------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) The Ambassador acknowledged that the USG was 
disappointed that Korea had decided not to come out and fully 
endorse PSI.  The ROKG and South Korean politicians, 
including the GNP, had failed to adequately explain to the 
Korean people what PSI was and what it was not.  The USG 
remained hopeful that Korea would consider fully supporting 
PSI and thereby send a stronger message to North Korea.  But 
we welcomed Korea's selective participation in PSI activities 
and exercises.  Kang said that he and his party had expended 
a lot of political capital in support of PSI, despite a lack 
of enthusiasm among the Korean public. 
 
SIX PARTY TALKS 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) When Kang expressed his concern that the U.S. 
appeared to be satisfied merely with getting the DPRK back to 
the negotiating table and had made a concession by agreeing 
to discuss the Banco Delta Asia (BDA) case bilaterally, the 
Ambassador disagreed.  He emphasized that the U.S. planned to 
be firm and demand concrete actions such as early 
dismantlement and destruction of nuclear facilities and the 
return of IAEA inspectors.  The Ambassador said that the 
announcement that the talks would resume was a product of 
multilateral pressure, especially through the UNSCR.  We had 
always been ready to discuss the BDA case bilaterally within 
the context of the Six Party Talks; this was not a 
concession.  Any resolution to BDA will need to involve the 
DPRK's curtailment of its illicit activity, the Ambassador 
said. 
VERSHBOW
</file>