^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3922  |  2006-11-14 05:42  |  기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PARM PREL MNUC KNNP KN KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 에이펙 정상회의에서의 한미 장관급 회담을 위한 무대연출 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 003922 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))
국방부망 배포
국무부는 하노이 에이펙 회의에서 동아태 힐 차관보와 동아태/한국 김 과장에게 전달하세요((DEPARTMENT PASS TO EAP A/S HILL AND EAP/K DIRECTOR KIM AT APEC IN HANOI))

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 11/13/2016 
태그: PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), MNUC(([Military Nuclear Applications])), KNNP(([Nuclear Non-Proliferation])), KN(([Korea (North)])), KS(([Korea (South)])) 
제 목: 에이펙 정상회의에서의 한미 장관급 회담을 위한 무대연출
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사  근거 1.4 (b/d) 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/06 04:45//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 국무장관님: 11월 18일 남한 통일외교안보정책수석과 외교부 장관 내정자 송민순과 함께할 당신의 회동은 한국이 중요한 전환기에 진입한 시기에 이루어지게 됩니다. 외교 정책 영역에서의 변화는 10월 9일 북한 핵실험과 함께 시작되었습니다. 그 변화는 일 년 조금 더 지나면 남한의 새 대통령이 집권하고 정책 방향을 설립할 때 끝날 것입니다. 과도기에 노 대통령은 새 국가안보팀을 임명하였고, 평양의 도발과 국제사회의 의지에 대응하기 위해서 (비록 내키지는 않지만) 남북 정책을 재조정하기 시작하였습니다. 저는 이러한 재조정이 한미 관계에 가져다줄 더 중요한 도전과 기회 중의 일부를 강조하고 싶습니다.
  * 10월 9일 북한의 핵 실험은 남한의 대북 포용정책에 대한 국내 재평가를 촉발하였습니다; 그 과정은 막 시작되었을 뿐이며 현 한국 지도부의 저항이 있는 상태이지만, 덜 진취적이고 한층 조건이 붙은 대북 접근이 이어질 듯합니다. 저는 국무장관께서 외교통상부 장관 내정자 송민순에게 그러한 대북 접근의 재검토를 장려할 것을 추천합니다.

  * 북한의 도발적인 행동은 한미동맹의 지속적인 가치를 한국인에게 환기했습니다. 그와 동시에 전시 작전통제권 이양을 두고 심한 논쟁 양상은 한국에 대한 미합중국의 장기적인 헌신에 대해 많은 이들의 의구심을 불러 일으켰습니다. 당신은 미국이 남한 수호에 대한 헌신에 충실하다고 안심시킴으로써 그런 우려를 덜어 줄 수 있습니다. 한편 그와 동시에 한국이 더는 지연 없는 미군의 변환에 진척을 이루고, 주한 미군의 비 인적 주둔군 비용의 50대 50 분담을 수용함으로써 미국에 대한 헌신을 증명해 보이라고 한국을 독려할 수 있습니다.

  * 송민순 장관 내정자는 한미동맹에 대한 재확인을 모색할 뿐만 아니라, 한반도 상황이 더는 불안정해지지 않도록 6자 회담을 앞두고 국무장관과 함께 외교적 방안을 타진하길 원할 것입니다. 송민순은 무엇보다도 다음 6자 회담 일정에서 미국 대표단이 내놓을 “조기 성과” 측면의 접근 방식과 관련해 국무장관과의 긴밀한 협의에 관심을 두고 있을 것입니다.

  * 미국의 외교 정책 의제의 일부는 아니지만, 2007년 한국 대통령 선거로 가는 길목에 한미 관계에 충격을 미치게 될 남한 국내 정치도 전환기가 진행 중입니다. 노 대통령은 현재 단 10%의 지지율이며, 그의 실패한 대북 포용정책과 때때로 고의적인 반미 감정에 호소 등 한미 관계에 손상을 입힌 이유로 맹비난을 받았습니다. 송민순 외교통상부 장관 내정자도 지난달 미합중국이 다른 어떤 국가들보다도 전쟁에 연루되어 있다며 나무라는 듯한 발언을 하면서 문제를 더 키웠습니다. 그런 주장에 대한 좋은 대응은 근대 남한 발전 역사에서 미국이 수행한 건설적인 역할을 송민순에게 상기하고, 양국 정부가 공유하는 중요한 민주주의 원칙을 지적하고, 한미 FTA와 한국의 비자 면제 프로그램 회원국 가입 등이 수반할 훈훈한 한미 관계에 대한 전망을 제시하는 등이 될 것입니다.

  * 국무장관의 회동은 한국이 세계 곳곳에서 소중한 기여를 지속하도록 장려하고, 강조하는 기회를 또한 제공합니다. 주지하다시피 노무현 대통령과 함께한 2006년 9월 정상회담 중에 부시 대통령이 강조한 바 있습니다. 이라크 한국군 파병을 비롯해 에르빌 지역재건팀을 주도한 능동적 자세, 아프간 북대서양조약기구 사령부 예하로 두는 한국 공병과 의료 인력의 전환, 레바논의 레바논임시주둔유엔군 평화유지 노력에 규모 있는 파병을 기여하기로 한 한국 정부의 임박한 결정 등이 그에 해당합니다.

===== 햇볕정책은 흔들렸지만, 아직 교란되지는 않아 =====

2. (기밀) 남한 정부는 북한의 핵 실험 소식에 당연히 흔들렸음을 알 수 있습니다. 당일 날 대국민 담화에서 노 대통령은 늘 그렇듯이 솔직하였고, 자신의 포용정책에 앞날에 대해 큰 의구심을 나타냈습니다. 노무현은 핵 실험의 파장으로 자신의 “평화와 번영” 정책을 유지하기 어렵게 되었다며, 그 이유는 남한이 “모든 일을 감내하고 모든 일에 양보하고, 또한 북한의 하는 모든 일을 수용”할 수는 없기 때문이라고 말하였습니다. 그러나 그날 이후로, 실패한 정책에 대한 보수주의 반대파들의 강력한 비난에도 노무현은 핵 실험에 대한 그의 강력한 어조의 비난에 걸맞은 제재 적용을 거부하였습니다. 많은 이들이 그의 국가안보팀을 해임하라고 노무현에게 요구하였지만, 노무현의 외교정책참모인 송민순을 반기문을 대체하는 외교통상부 장관으로 임명하는 선택을 하였습니다. 그 뒤 11월 13일 면밀한 검토 이후 정부의 남북정책에 대한 소폭의 수정만을 가하겠다는 다소 실망스러운 세 가지 발표는 유엔안보리 결의안 1695호와 1718호 문안을 지지하며, (그러나 결의안의 정신을 지지하지는 않는) 대량살상무기 확산방지구상을 “지원”하지만 “가입”하지는 않는다는 내용입니다. 그러한 결정은 대북 포용정책을 전면 수정하기보다는 어떻게 든 수습해 보겠다는 노 대통령의 열망을 분명하게 보여주고 있습니다.

3. (기밀) 북한의 핵 실험 직후에, 한국은 포용 정책 전체를 재검토하고 있다는 발표를 하였습니다. 소폭 조정된 첫 조치는 노무현 정부는 7월 북한의 심각한 홍수 이후 북한에 제공된 시멘트와 식량 긴급 수송을 중단했습니다. 또한, 7월 미사일 발사 이후에도 반복되던 인도적인 원조의 수송을 계속 중단하기로 하였습니다. 그러나 진정한 논쟁은 포용 정책의 양대 주력 사업인 개성공단과 금강산 관광 사업에 대해 무엇을 하는 가로 요약됩니다. 국무장관도 아시다시피 이 양대 사업은 북한 정권의 금융상의 혜택의 측면에서 서로 상당히 다릅니다:
  * 개성공업지구는 2002년 출범해 13개 남한 업체가 입주하고 있으며, 북한 내부에 자유시장경제를 도입하겠다는 목표와 함께 9,000명 이상의 북한 주민을 고용하고 있습니다. 대게 개성공단 근로자들에게 지급되는 급료 중에서 북한 정부가 “공제”해서 나온 매달 미화 15만 달러의 재정 수입을 북한 정권에 가져다준다고 평가됩니다.

  * 금강산관광지구는 1998년에 출범해 100만 명 이상의 남한 관광객을 유치하였는데, 사실상 남북한 시민 사이의 실질적 접촉이 배제된 고립된 장소입니다. 금강산 사업은 비교가 안 되는 한 달에 미화 백만 달러를 북한 정부에 올려주는 사업입니다.
그러나 대량살상무기와 대량살상무기 관련 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호의 좁은 해석을 고려할 때, 노무현 정부는 그들로 하여금 개성공단이나 금강산에서의 활동을 동결하거나 축소하도록 하는 요건이 없다고 주장한 바 있습니다. 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호에 대한 문자 그대로의 최소한의 해석은 북한에 적절한 메시지를 보내지 못하며, 한국 정부가 최소한 북한의 돈줄인 금강산 사업을 축소해야 한다는 미국의 주장을 다시 한 번 강조하길 국무장관님은 희망하실 겁니다.

4. (기밀) 북한과의 지속적인 교류를 정당화하려는 노무현 정부의 노력에도, 포용정책에 대한 효용성을 두고 정부 안에서, 그리고 한국 사회 전반을 통해 의견차가 크게 나뉘는 점은 분명합니다. 막강한 권한의 통일부는 포용정책에 대한 모든 측면을 감독하는데, 열린우리당 의원들과 더불어 남북협력의 규모를 줄이거나 포기하는 일에 강력히 반대하고 있습니다. 한편 외교통상부, 국방부, 국정원은 북한과 국제사회에 강력한 신호를 보내려면 남북사업을 즉각 동결해야 한다고 주장하였습니다. 대사관 접선책은 지난 한 달간 정부 부처 간 극심한 국내 정쟁이 정부의 최상부를 집어삼키고 있다고 확인해 주었습니다. 이러한 골 깊은 정치 분열에 대응하기 위해 남한 정부는 마침내 대북 포용 정책에 대해 심각한 재평가를 시작하였습니다. 단지 방금 시작된 과정이긴 하지만, 재평가는 다가올 한국 대통령 선거 캠페인 내내 계속될 것이며, 앞으로 대북 접근방식은 덜 진취적이고, 더욱 조건이 붙은 방향으로 나아갈 가능성이 큽니다.

===== 대량살상무기 확산방지구상에 대한 정치적 타협 =====

5. (기밀) 북한의 핵 실험 이후에 대량살상무기 확산방지구상의(이하 PSI) 전면 가입 여부는 한국 정부 내에서 격렬한 논쟁이 역시 벌어졌습니다. 현재까지 한국은 참관인으로 특정 PSI에 선별적으로 참여해오고 있지만, PSI 차단 원칙의 승인은 사양했습니다. 당시 PSI를 승인하기 위한 반기문 외교통상부 장관과 송민순 외교통상부 장관 내정자의 노력은 김근태 의장이 이끄는 집권당 열린우리당 의원들의 반발에 부딪혔습니다. 김근태는 PSI 가입은 한국이 쿠바 미사일 위기와 같은 대북 해상 봉쇄에 참여하도록 요구하며, 정전협정을 무너뜨리고, 전쟁을 촉발할 수도 있다는 잘못된 혐의를 제기했습니다. 이러한 잘못된 정보에 반박하는 노력은 다시 일부 설 땅을 얻었지만, 정부는 여전히 PSI 문제에 대한 피 튀기는 내부 정쟁에 관여하길 꺼리고 있습니다.

===== 한미동맹 강화로 북한에 대응 =====

6. (기밀) 노무현 정부는 사면초가에 빠진 포용 정책을 구하기 위해 후방에서 전투를 벌이고 있지만, 그 어느 때보다도 한미 동맹이 남한의 국가 안보 이해관계에 필요하다는 서울에 퍼진 광범위한 합의가 있습니다; 너무도 필요한 나머지 미국 정부의 전시 작전통제권 조기 이양 추진은 한국 사회 많은 부분에서 반발을 촉발하였습니다. 그들은 전작권 이양이 한국 수호에 대한 미국의 헌신이 줄어들까 우려를 합니다. 외교통상부 내정자인 송민순이 포용정책에 대한 생각을 바꾸라는 설득은 어렵겠지만, 국무장관이 한미동맹에 대한 뒷받침이 북한에 의한 도발에 대한 적절한 대응이라는 주장에는 더 수용적일 수도 있습니다. 10월 워싱턴 안보협의회의에 대한 후속 조치로, 만일 국무장관이 미군 변환에 관련해 미국과 함께 전진함으로써, 주한미군의 비 인적 주둔군 비용의 50% 분담금 지급에 합의함으로써, 한미동맹에 대한 지지를 입증해 보이라고 한국에 촉구한다면 주한 미군에 특히 도움이 될 것입니다. 그 대가로, 우리가 남한 수호 약속에 충실하겠다고 보장함으로써 한국민의 안보 위협을 크게 완화할 수 있습니다.

===== 6자 회담의 앞날 =====

7. (기밀) 노 대통령의 통일외교안보수석을 역임했고, 지금은 외교통상부 장관 내정자인 송민순은 남한 외교정책문제의 전반과 특히 북한 정책에서 노 대통령의 최측근 참모로 간주합니다. 저는 송민순과의 회동을 2005년 9.19 공동성명 이행 과정을 시작하라고 북한을 장려하도록 긴밀한 협력을 구축하는 데 활용하라고 국무장관께 권고합니다. 남한은 북한 정부에 강력한 메시지를 보낼 필요성에 우리와 뜻을 같이하지만, 외교와 제재의 조화를 원하고 있습니다. 송민순은 북한이 국제적인 지탄과 제재를 받는 길을 계속 가지 말고, 9.19 공동성명에 나와 있는 보탬이 되는 길을 선택함이 훨씬 현명할 거란 메시지를 북한에 전달해 주는 중요한 동지가 될 수도 있습니다. 당신은 한국 정부의 10월 9일 핵 실험에 대한 반응이 현재까지 실망스러우며, 북한이 자체 핵 사업을 포기하겠다는 약속에 충실하다는 북한의 주장을 시험해 보기 위해서 한국의 남북 포용정책을 내놓을 준비를 할 필요가 있음을 분명히 밝혀야만 합니다. 송민순에게도 북한 정부에 그 점을 분명히 하도록 장려해야 할 것입니다.

8. (기밀) 국무장관께서는 북한에 당근을 제공해 외교적인 해결책을 달성하는데 논의의 초점을 맞추고 싶어하는 송민순을 보게 될 것입니다. 그러나 장관께서는 유엔안보리 결의안 1695호와 1718호는 북한이 6자 회담에 복귀하도록 남한 정부의 너그러움과 중국의 인내심과는 현저히 다른 회초리를 드는 일임을 송민순에게 환기할 수 있습니다. 송민순은 북한의 핵 실험을 참작할 때, 예전과 동일한 요구와 더불어 단순히 회담에 복귀하도록 하는 일은 충분치 않다는 데 동의할 것입니다. 오히려 미합중국, 남한, 여타 6자 회담 당사국들이 북한의 핵 무장의 길을 역전하도록 필요한 북한의 초기 조치에 초점을 맞출 필요가 있습니다.

9. (기밀) 송민순은 통일외교안보수석으로서 외교적인 접근을 선호한다는 점에서 미국과 견해를 같이합니다. 그는 핵 실험의 여파로 북한이 6자 회담 재계를 목표로 하는 거래를 하려 한다면 북한 측에서 “선취 수수료”가 필요함을 그는 인식하고 있습니다. 그의 관점에서 그 핵심 사안은:
  * 북한이 6자 회담의 재계와 동시에 새로운 미사일 발사와 핵 실험의 활동 중단을 설정하겠다는 북한의 약정, 또한 2005년 9.19 공동성명과 1992년『한반도의 비핵화에 관한 공동선언』의 재확인

  * 영변 5매가 와트 경수로의 운행 중단에 대한 합의와 6자 회담의 재계 된 이후 이른 시점에 국제원자력기구 사찰원을 초대하고, 남은 9.19 공동성명의 신속한 이행

  * 미국이 그에 상응해서 동결된 북한의 방코델타아시아 계정 문제를 해결하겠다는 합의와 갱신된 6자 회담의 문맥 안에서 앞선 한국과의 협의에서 논의된 바대로 금융 문제에 대한 북미 간 논의.

===== 밝은 미래에 대한 조명 =====

10. (기밀) 북한이 양국의 가장 큰 도전 중의 하나로 남아 있지만, 한미관계는 대체로 희소식이 있습니다. 한 세대도 채 되지 않아, 남한 국민은 한국을 후진 권위주의 정권에 나라에서 세계에서 11번째로 큰 경제 규모의 성숙한 민주주의 국가로 변모시켰으며, 또한 유엔 사무총장을 배출하였습니다. 그러나 변하지 않은 것은 다수의 여론 조사에서 입증되었듯이 (비록 조용하긴 하지만) 압도적인 다수의 남한 사람들은 한미 관계에 애착이 있다는 단연 중요한 점입니다. 국무장관님, 그런 한국인들은 남한을 수호하겠다는 미국의 약속을 당신이 재확인하길 기대할 것입니다. 그들은 북한에 대해 한층 통일된 외교적인 접근 방식의 구축 노력을 지지할 것입니다.

11. (기밀) 노 대통령은 여러 가지 중에서도 반미 감정을 자극해 미국과의 관계에 손상을 가하면서 끝 모를 최하 12% 지지율을 기록했습니다((‘제 속 짚어 남의 말 한다’는 관용구가 생각난다. 대사는 ‘조중동’이란 단어의 뜻을 알겠지만, 그 영향력을 간과하고 있다. 얼어죽은 ‘미국찬양’은 끝 간대 없다.)). 반미 감정은 한미동맹이 필요성을 재발견한 시점에 한국민들을 불안하게 만들었습니다. 송민순은 몇 주 전에 노무현의 파괴적인 성향을 흉내 냈는데, 당시에 송민순은 미합중국이 다른 어떤 나라보다도 많은 전쟁에 연루되어 있다고 비난하였습니다. 그런 주장에 대한 적절한 대응은 남한 발전의 현대사에 미국이 수행한 건설적인 역할을 송민순에게 상기시키고, 양국 정부가 공유하는 중요한 민주주의 원칙을 언급하고, 한미 FTA와 한국의 비자 면제 프로그램 회원국 가입 등이 수반할 훈훈한 한미관계에 대한 전망을 제시하는 등이 될 것입니다.

12. (기밀) 마지막으로 국무장관의 회동은 한국이 세계 곳곳에서 기여한 값진 공헌을 지속해 달라고 장려하고 강조했던 사례인 9월 한미 정상회담에서의 미 대통령의 발언과 한국정부와 함께한 11월 7일 닉번 차관의 전략적 대화에 뒤이은 훌륭한 기회를 제공합니다. 한국의 공헌은 이라크 자이툰 파병 (세 번째로 큰 이라크 분견대), 에르빌 지역재건팀에서의 한국의 주도적 역할, 아프간 북대서양조약기구 사령부 예하에 두는 한국 공병과 의료 인력의 전환, 레바논의 레바논임시주둔유엔군 평화유지 노력에 규모 있는 파병 공헌을 하게 될 한국정부의 임박한 결정 등이 그에 해당합니다. 한미동맹의 일부 난관에도 우리가 대체로 세계 다른 어느 국가보다도 한국과의 상호 이익관계를 만끽하고 있다는, 확대된 한미관계에 대한 이러한 매우 긍정적인 측면을 부각함으로써 송민순 외교통상부 장관과의 회동을 마감하길 저는 국무장관께 권고합니다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3922|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL3922.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003922 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO EAP A/S HILL AND EAP/K DIRECTOR KIM AT 
APEC IN HANOI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2016 
TAGS: PARM [Arms Controls and Disarmament], PREL [External Political Relations], MNUC [Military Nuclear Applications], KNNP [Nuclear Non-Proliferation], KN [Korea (North)], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR U.S.- ROK MINISTERIAL AT APEC 
 
Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1.  (C) Madam Secretary: Your November 18 meeting with South 
Korean National Security Advisor and Foreign 
Minister-designate Song Min-soon comes as the Republic of 
Korea (ROK) has entered a period of significant transition. 
In the foreign policy arena, change began with the October 9 
DPRK nuclear test.  It will end when a new South Korean 
president comes to power in little more than a years' time 
and establishes his/her policy direction.  In the interim, 
President Roh has appointed a new national security team and 
begun to readjust (albeit reluctantly) his North-South policy 
in response to Pyongyang's provocation and the will of the 
international community.  I would like to highlight some of 
the more important challenges and opportunities this presents 
to the U.S.-ROK relationship. 
 
-- The October 9 North Korean nuclear test prompted a 
domestic reassessment of South Korea's engagement policy with 
the North; a process that has only just begun, and is being 
resisted by current ROK leadership, but one that will likely 
lead to a less forward-leaning and more conditional approach 
toward Pyongyang.  I highly recommend you encourage 
FM-designate Song to engage in that rethinking. 
 
-- North Korea's provocative actions have reminded the Korean 
people of the continued value of the U.S.-ROK Alliance. 
Simultaneously, a highly contentious debate over the transfer 
of wartime operational control (OPCON) has caused many to 
question the long-term commitment of the United States to its 
ally.  You can alleviate that concern by assuring we remain 
fully committed to the defense of South Korea, while at the 
same time encouraging the ROK to demonstrate its commitment 
to us by moving forward on military transformation without 
further delay, and by accepting a 50/50 share in the 
non-personnel stationing costs for U.S. Forces Korea (USFK). 
 
-- In addition to seeking reaffirmation of the Alliance, 
FM-designate Song will want to explore with you a diplomatic 
way ahead for Six-Party talks, to prevent further 
destabilization of the situation on the Korean Peninsula.  He 
will above all be interested in consulting closely with you 
on the "early harvest" aspect of the approach the U.S. 
delegation will bring to the next round of the Six-Party 
Talks. 
 
-- While not a part of our foreign policy agenda, South 
Korean domestic politics is also undergoing a state of 
transition that will impact U.S.-ROK relations in the lead up 
to the 2007 ROK presidential election.  President Roh 
currently has an approval rating of only 12 percent, and has 
come under heavy fire for both his failed engagement policy 
towards the North, and for doing damage to ROK relations with 
Washington by deliberately appealing at times to 
anti-American sentiment.  FM-designate Song added to that 
problem last month when he appeared to fault the United 
States for engaging in more wars than any other country.  A 
good response to that would be to remind him of the 
constructive role the United States has played in the modern 
history of South Korean development, note the important 
democratic principles shared by our two governments, and hold 
out the prospects for the warmer relations that would 
accompany a Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and admission of 
the ROK into the U.S. visa waiver program. 
 
-- Your meeting also provides an opportunity to highlight and 
encourage the continuation of valuable ROK contributions 
around the world, as was highlighted by the President during 
his September 2006 summit meeting with President Roh.  These 
include the South Korean troop dispatch to Iraq, ROK 
willingness to lead a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) in 
Irbil, the transition of ROK engineers and medical personnel 
under NATO command in Afghanistan, as well as an upcoming 
decision by the ROKG to make a sizable troop contribution to 
the UNIFIL peacekeeping effort in Lebanon. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
SUNSHINE POLICY SHAKEN, BUT NOT YET STIRRED 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) The South Korean government was understandably shaken 
by the news of the DPRK nuclear test.  Speaking to the nation 
that day, President Roh was typically frank, airing deep 
personal doubts about the viability of his engagement policy. 
 He said it would be difficult to maintain his "Peace and 
Prosperity" policy in the aftermath of the test, because 
South Korea could not "have patience on everything, make 
concessions on everything, and accept everything that the 
North does."  Since that day, however, and despite strong 
criticism of his failed policy from conservative opponents 
and the mainstream media, Roh has refused to apply sanctions 
consistent with the strong tone of his condemnation of the 
test.  While many called on Roh to fire his national security 
team, he has instead opted to name his leading foreign policy 
advisor -- Song Min-soon -- to replace Ban Ki-moon as foreign 
minister.  Then, on November 13, the ROKG made three rather 
disappointing announcements indicating after careful review 
that it would make only minor adjustments to its North-South 
policy, would support the letter (but hardly the spirit) of 
UNSCR 1695 and 1718, and would "support" but not "endorse" 
PSI.  These decisions clearly demonstrate President Roh's 
desire to try and salvage, rather than overhaul, his 
engagement policy towards the North. 
 
¶3. (C) Immediately after the nuclear test, the ROK announced 
it was reviewing the entire engagement policy.  As a first, 
minor adjustment, the Roh government suspended emergency 
shipments of cement and food that it had offered the DPRK 
after the serious floods in the North in July.  It also 
decided to continue to suspend shipments of routine 
humanitarian aid announced after the missile launches in 
July, and totaling over a hundred million dollars.  The real 
debate, however, came down to what to do about the two 
flagship engagement policy projects -- the Kaesong Industrial 
Complex (KIC) and the Mount Kumgang tourism project.  As you 
are aware, these two projects vary considerably in terms of 
financial benefits to the DPRK regime: 
 
-- The Kaesong Industrial Complex, launched in 2002, houses 
13 South Korean companies, employs more than 9,000 North 
Koreans with the goal of introducing free-market economics 
into the DPRK.  It is estimated to bring the DPRK regime 
roughly USD 150,000 per month in revenue, largely from the 
DPRK government's "cut" of the salaries paid to KIC workers. 
 
-- The Mt. Kumgang tourist area, since its launch in 1998, 
has attracted more than one million South Korean visitors to 
an enclave in which there is virtually no real contact 
between South and North Korean citizens.  It earns the DPRK 
government a much more significant USD 1 million per month. 
 
Given UNSCR 1718's narrow focus on WMD and WMD-related 
financing, however, the Roh Administration has argued that 
there is no requirement for them to freeze or curtail 
activities at either Kaesong or Mt. Kumgang.  You may wish to 
once again stress our case that a literal, minimalist 
interpretation of UNSCR 1718 fails to send the proper message 
to Pyongyang, and that Seoul should, at a minimum, cut back 
on the cash-cow Mt. Kumgang project. 
 
¶4. (C) Despite the Roh Administration's efforts to justify 
continued engagement with the North, deep division over the 
efficacy of that policy is clearly evident within the 
government, and throughout Korean society as a whole.  The 
powerful Ministry of Unification (MOU), which oversees all 
aspects of the engagement policy, alongside members of the 
ruling Uri Party, strongly oppose abandoning, or even scaling 
back, North-South cooperation.  Meanwhile, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade (MOFAT), Ministry of National 
Defense (MND), and National Intelligence Service (NIS) have 
argued for an immediate freeze of engagement projects so as 
to send a strong signal to the DPRK and the international 
community.  Embassy contacts have confirmed that a fierce 
inter-agency domestic political battle has consumed the 
government over the past month at the highest levels.  In 
response to this deep political divide, the South Korean 
government has, at long last, begun a serious reassessment of 
its engagement policy with the North.  While it is a process 
that has only just begun, it will continue throughout the 
upcoming ROK presidential campaign, most likely leading 
toward a less forward-leaning, more conditional approach 
toward Pyongyang in the future. 
 
--------------------------- 
POLITICAL COMPROMISE ON PSI 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Whether to fully endorse the Proliferation Security 
Initiative (PSI) has also been hotly debated within the ROK 
government since the October DPRK nuclear test.  To date, the 
Koreans have been participating on a selective basis as an 
observer in certain PSI activities, but have declined to 
endorse the Statement of Interdiction Principles.  Efforts by 
then-Foreign Minister Ban Ki-moon, and Foreign 
Minister-designate Song to bring the ROKG to endorse PSI have 
met with a hostile reaction from members of the ruling Uri 
party, led by Party Chairman Kim Geun-tae, who has falsely 
alleged that joining PSI would require the ROK to engage in a 
Cuban Missile Crisis-like naval blockade of the North, 
breaking the Armistice and possibly triggering a war. 
Efforts made to counter this misinformation have gained back 
some ground, but the government remains reluctant to engage 
in a bloody domestic political battle over the issue. 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
RESPOND TO THE NORTH BY SHORING UP THE ALLIANCE 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6.  (C) While the Roh Administration fights a rear-guard 
action to rescue its besieged engagement policy, there is 
widespread agreement in Seoul that the U.S.-ROK Alliance is 
more necessary than ever to South Korean national security 
interests; so necessary, the USG push for early transfer of 
wartime operational control has prompted a backlash from many 
segments of Korean society concerned that OPCON transfer will 
lead to a diminished U.S. commitment to defend the ROK. 
While you will find it difficult to persuade FM-designate 
Song to change his thinking on the engagement policy, you may 
find him more receptive to arguments that shoring up the 
U.S.-ROK Alliance constitutes an important and appropriate 
response to provocative behavior by the North.  Following up 
on the October Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) in 
Washington, it would be particularly helpful to USFK if you 
were to urge the ROK to demonstrate its support for the 
Alliance by moving forward with us on military 
transformation, and by agreeing to pay a 50 percent share of 
USFK's non-personnel stationing costs.  In turn, you can 
greatly alleviate the security concerns of the Korean people 
by assuring we remain fully committed to the defense of South 
Korea. 
 
-------------------------------- 
THE WAY AHEAD ON SIX-PARTY TALKS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) As National Security Advisor to President Roh, and now 
his Foreign Minister-designate, Song Min-soon is regarded as 
President-Roh's closest advisor on South Korean foreign 
policy issues in general, and the North-South policy in 
particular.  I recommend you use your meeting with him to 
forge closer cooperation on encouraging the DPRK to begin the 
process of implementing the September 2005 Joint Statement. 
The South Koreans are with us on the need to send a strong 
message to Pyongyang, but want to synchronize sanctions with 
diplomacy.  Song could be an important ally in delivering the 
message to the North that it would be far wiser for Pyongyang 
to choose the beneficial path ahead outlined in the joint 
statement, than to continue on the road of sanctions and 
international condemnation.  You should make clear to Song 
that the ROKG, whose reaction to the October 9 test has so 
far been disappointing, needs to be  prepared to put its 
inter-Korean engagement policy on the line in order to test 
the North Koreans' claim that it remains committed to giving 
up its nuclear programs.  Song should be encouraged to make 
that clear to Pyongyang as well. 
 
¶8. (C) You will find Song eager to focus your discussion on 
achieving a diplomatic solution through the provision of 
carrots to the DPRK.  However, you can remind him that it was 
the brandishing of the stick -- UNSCR 1695 and 1718 -- that 
did far more than South Korean generosity or Chinese patience 
to convince the DPRK to return to the talks.  He will agree 
that in light of the DPRK nuclear test it is not enough 
simply for the North Koreans to return to the talks with the 
same old demands.  Rather, the United States, South Korea, 
and our other partners at the Six-Party process need to focus 
on the initial steps required of Pyongyang to reverse the 
course of North Korean nuclearization. 
 
¶9. (C) As National Security Advisor, Song shared with us his 
preferred diplomatic approach.  He recognized that in the 
aftermath of the nuclear test the DPRK would need to 
"front-load" its side of any deal aimed at restarting the Six 
Party Talks.  In his view, the key elements would be: 
 
-- Commitments by North Korea to establish a new moratorium 
on missile launches and nuclear tests upon resumption of the 
Six Party Talks, as well as reaffirmation of the September 
2005 Joint Statement and the 1992 North-South Declaration on 
Denuclearization. 
 
-- Agreement by North Korea to suspend operation of the 
Yongbyon 5-megawatt reactor and invite IAEA inspectors at a 
very early stage after the resumption of the Six Party Talks, 
and to implement the rest of the Joint Statement on an 
accelerated basis. 
 
-- Corresponding agreement by the U.S. to address the frozen 
DPRK accounts in Banco Delta Asia and hold bilateral 
discussions on financial matters within the context of the 
renewed Six Party Talks, as discussed in our earlier 
consultations with the ROK. 
 
------------------------ 
FOCUS ON A BRIGHT FUTURE 
------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (C) While North Korea remains one of your greatest 
foreign policy challenges, U.S.-ROK relations are 
by-and-large a good news story.  In less than a generation, 
the South Korean people have transformed their country from 
an underdeveloped authoritarian regime to a full-fledged 
democracy with the world's 11th-largest economy and home to 
the next UN Secretary General.  What has not changed, 
however, is the deep importance the overwhelming (albeit too 
often silent) majority of South Koreans attach to their 
nation's relationship with the United States, as evidenced by 
numerous opinion polls.  Madam Secretary, these Koreans will 
look to you to reaffirm our commitment to defend South Korea. 
 They also will support efforts to forge a more unified 
diplomatic approach to the North. 
 
¶11.  (C) President Roh has earned his abysmally low 12 
percent approval rating by, among other things, doing damage 
to relations with Washington by playing to anti-American 
sentiments.  This makes the Korean people nervous at a time 
when they have rediscovered their need for that alliance. 
Song mimicked Roh's destructive tendency several weeks ago 
when he appeared to blame the United States for engaging in 
more wars than any other country.  An appropriate response 
would be to remind him of the constructive role the United 
States has played in the modern history of South Korean 
development, note the important democratic principles shared 
by our two governments, and hold out the prospects for the 
still warmer relations that would evolve from a Korea-U.S. 
Free Trade Agreement and admission of the ROK into the U.S. 
visa waiver program. 
 
¶12.  (C) Finally, your meeting provides an excellent 
opportunity to follow up on the President's comments at the 
September summit, and Under Secretary Nick Burns' strategic 
dialogue with the ROKG on November 7, both of which 
highlighted and encouraged continuation of valuable ROK 
contributions around the world.  These include the Zaytun 
troop dispatch to Iraq (the third largest contingent there), 
ROK willingness to lead a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) 
in Irbil, the transition of ROK engineers and medical 
personnel under NATO command in Afghanistan, and most 
recently, their pending decision to send a sizable 
contribution of ROK troops to the ongoing UNIFIL peacekeeping 
effort in Lebanon.  I encourage you to end your meeting with 
FM-designate Song by highlighting these very positive aspects 
of our larger relationship, for despite some difficulties in 
the Alliance, we enjoy a more mutually-beneficial 
relationship with the ROK than with almost any other country 
in the world. 
VERSHBOW
</file>