^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3170  |  2006-09-14 08:41  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PREL KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 젊은 세대가 차기 대통령의 당락을 가름할 것인가? ======
미분류 SEOUL 003170 
국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), KS(([Korea (South)] ))
제목: 젊은 세대가 차기 대통령의 당락을 가름할 것인가?
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/04/01 06:33//
===== 요점 =====

1. (미분류) 요점: 역사적으로 지역주의는 한국 대통령 선거에서 중요한 역할을 해왔다. 그러나 2002년 젊은 유권자들이 성공적으로 결집해서 이회창을 2.2% 차로 따돌리는 데 도움이 됐다. 언론은 미친 듯이 “젊은 세대의 혁명”이라고 떠들어 댔는데 자료를 보면 그 말을 뒷받침하는 듯하다. 지역 투표 통계의 면밀한 분석을 보면, 젊은 유권자들은 나이 든 유권자들보다 지역주의적 영향을 덜 받는 것으로 보인다. 이와 아울러 젊은 유권자가 2002년에 사용한 과학 기술에 힘을 입은 득표 사례들은 선거의 표준이 되었다. 그러나 2007년 12월 차기 대통령 선거는 “젊은 세대의 혁명”이 진짜 혁명인지 진정한 시험 무대가 될 것이다. 요약 끝.

2. (미분류) 남한의 지역주의는―특히 서남부(호남)과 동남부(영남) 지역 간―악명이 높다; 유권자들은 자기 고향 후보자를 선택할 뿐만 아니라 경쟁 지역의 후보에 반대하는 투표를 자주 한다. 이 점이 김영삼(영남)과 김대중(호남)이 1987년 대선에서 맞대결하지 않겠다고 공개적으로 약속한 하나의 이유였다. 왜냐면 양 후보의 출신 지역에서 야당 표를 갈라놓을 것을 알고 있었기 때문이다. (주석: 양 김의 약속과는 달리 서로 출마해서 맞대결을 펼쳤으며 해당 지역 유권자들은 예상한 그대로 투표를 했다―그 결과 집권당인 노태우에게 대통령직을 안겨주었다. 주석 끝.) 그러나, 2002년 대선에서 젊은 세대가 가져온 충격 이후에, 언론은 한국 사람들이 엄격한 지역적 구도보다는 세대 구도에 따라 투표하기 시작했다고 추정했다.

===== 세대의 정의 =====

3. (미분류) 한국전쟁은 오늘날 한국의 구세대를 규정짓는 사건이다. 이념적으로 한국전쟁을 기억할 만큼 나이가 들었으며 강력한 반공주의자이며 철저하게 친미주의자들이다. 그들은 또한 북한을 적으로 보는 경향이 있으며 북한 정권을 어떻게 대처할지 관련 강한 견해를 지니고 있다. 정치적으로 사회적으로 이 세대는 보수다. 경제적으로 50세 이상인 이들은 인권을 포함 다른 무엇보다도 경제성장을 우선시하는 “성장 우선” 이념에 동조하는 경향이 있다. 인구통계학상으로 보면, 이들의 나이는 50대 이상으로 인구에 24%를(11,387,000명) 차지한다. 이는 통계청이 2005년에 발표한 인구 조사 수치다.

4. (미분류) 한국의 386세대에 대해선 많은 글이 나와 있다: 30대에 속한 이들은 80년대에 대학을 다녔고, 60년대에 태어났다. (주석: 이 별칭은 1990년대에 처음 등장한 까닭에 이들 대부분은 현재 40대에 속한다. 주석 끝.) 이 세대를 규정할 두 사건은 광주 대학살과 1980년대 민주화 운동이다. 비록 당시에 그들은 젊었지만, 이 세대는 1960년대와 1970년대 박정희 독재 정권을 경험했고 당시 1980년대 관련 군사 정권에 맞서 시위를 했다. 학생운동권은 북한과의 즉각적인 통일을 촉구했고 종종 노동조합과의 연대해 힘을 합치기도 했다. 이념적으로 386세대는 반미주의자나 때론 친북주의자로 규정할 수 있다; 구시대의 인맥과 같은 전통적인 정치와 권력 모델을 거부한다. 정치적으로 이 세대는 가장 진보적이고 활동적이다. 경제적으로 50대 이상의 세대와는 달리 성장 우선 이념을 채택하지 않는다; 경제성장보다는 인권을 우선시한다. 인구통계학상으로 이들은 30대나 40대에 속하며 커다란 규모로 인구의 34%를 대변한다.

5. (미분류) 386세대의 다수는 정치나 대중의 견해에 영향을 미칠 수 있는 위치로 들어섰다. 그중 일부의 사례로 임종석이 있는데 전도유망한 386 지도자로 지금 국회의원이다. 다수의 1980년대 학생운동권 인사를 옹호해 온 노 대통령은 스스로 학생 운동권 참모들로 둘러싸여 있다. 성공회대 박경태 사회학 교수는 386세대 중 다수는 언론인이나 TV 뉴스 프로듀서가 되었다고 대사관 정무 직원에게 말했다. 그들의 영향력 있는 지위는 사회정치학적인 대화를 주창하며 더 진보적인 이야기 주제를 설명해준다.

6. (미분류) 20살 이쪽저쪽 세대는(혹은 인터넷 세대) 독재 정권에 대한 기억이 영글지 않은 한국의 첫 세대이다. 인터넷 세대는 한국의 민주화 이후에 성장했고 언론의 자유를 당연시한다. 그 결과 그들은 때때로 정치적으로 무관심하다. 이 세대는 인터넷 세대라고 부르는 까닭은 이들 다수가 온라인망에 연결되어 있기 때문이다. (주석: 알파벳 ‘씨’는 사이버, 컴퓨터 혹은 공동체를 가리킨다. 주석 끝) 비록 이 세대를 규정할 사건 자체가 없지만, 인터넷 붐이 다른 무엇보다도 이 세대를 정의한다. 한국의 젊은이들은 소셜네트워킹과 블로그 웹사이트를 수용했으며(예로 싸이월드는 최근 미국에 도입된 마이스페이스나 페이스북에 필적한다) 미국의 상대역보다 수용했는데 부분적으로 인터넷 광대역망 확산 덕분이다(주석: 2006년 정보통신부 자료에 따르며 거의 80%의 한국 가정은 광대역 고속 인터넷에 가입되어 있다. 주석 끝.)

7. (미분류) 이념적으로 인터넷 세대는 386세대보다는 더 보수적인 경향이 있지만, 특정 이념으로 구분되는 것에 반대한다. 인터넷 세대는(비록 2002년에 두 여중생이 주한미군 병사에 의해 실수로 살해된 이후 반미 시위에 다수가 참여하긴 했지만) 반미주의자로 구분될 수 없다. 이들은 구세대같이 의심할 바 없이 반북 세대도 아니며, 386세대처럼 친북 세대도 아니다. 경제적으로 이 세대는 선진 사회를 당연시한다. 그러나 90년대 말 아시아 경제위기를 경험했기 때문에 돈에 대한 생각이 복잡한 양상의 띄며 가끔은 무분별한 소비 생활을 하다가도 저축에 대해선 또 보수적이다. 20대에 속하는 세대는 자기중심적이며 개인주의적 성격을 띠고 있어 앞날에 대한 사회적 책임의식이 있는 다른 세대와는 반대이다. 인구통계학적으로 20대의 인구는 전체 인구의 15.5%를 차지하며 달리 말해 잠재적 유권자가 7,334,000명이다. 현재 15~19살인 사람은 전체 인구의 6.5%에 해당하는데 이 세대 가운데 2007년 12월 이전에 19살이 되는 사람들은 투표할 예정이다.

===== 과학기술을 활용해 젊은 유권자 포섭 =====

8. (미분류) 인터넷 세대와 386세대는 노무현 대통령을 당선시킨 공이 있다. 이는 그들이 유권자를 포섭하기 위한 인터넷과 휴대전화 기술에 능숙했던 이유도 부분적으로 있다. 선거 전날 밤에 정몽준 전 후보가 노무현 지지를 철회하자 사람들은 누리집에 메시지를 게재하고 휴대전화 메시지를 보내면서 노무현에 대해 지지를 유지해 달라고 촉구했다. 이렇게 젊은이들이 투표하도록 독려했고 권영길 민주노동당 후보에게 투표하려고 계획했던 사람들의 생각을 돌려놓았다. 노무현은 이회창을 단 2.2% 득표율 차이로 다시 말해 570.980 표차로 눌렀다. 인터넷은 평소 같으면 정치에 냉담한 사람들을 정치화시키는 데도 공을 세웠다. 그 이유는 “네티즌”들이 더 자주 정치적 웹사이트에 노출되기 때문이다.

9. (미분류) 특별히 유권자 결집을 유도한 한 언론 매체는 오마이뉴스였다. 온라인 뉴스 누리집으로 누리꾼 기자가 자신만의 기사를 작성할 수 있는 곳이다. 기사들은 게시 직전에 직원들이 사실관계 확인을 거친다. 이 웹사이트는 386세대인 오연호가 만들었다. 그는 “나는 386세대이며, 1980년대 군사 독재에 맞서 길바닥에서(원문 인용) 싸웠다. 20년이 지난 지금 우리는 인터넷으로 무장되어 있다”고 말한다. 오마이뉴스는 많은 네티즌이 기사를 제출하여 사람들을 투표장으로 나오도록 독려한다.

10. (미분류) 2002년 선거 이후에 언론은 “세대주의”가 한국 정치판에 지역주의를 극복할 잠재력을 지니고 있다고 광범위하게 보도했다. 2002년 말 시행한 중앙일보 여론조사는 20대와 30대 중 48.8%가 “세대 교체” 달리 말해 “세대 교대”를 위해서 노무현에 투표했다고 나타났다. 비평가들은 언론이 실상 존재하지 않는 세대 간 갈등이란 없는 신화를 지어낸 것일 수 있다고 평했다.

===== 세대 대항 지역 =====

11. (미분류) 총선을 나이별로 분석한 결과, 세대별로 자기 세대의 이념적, 정치적 경향에 따라 투표한 것으로 보인다. 20대와(62%) 30대의(60.2%) 유권자의 다수는 노무현에 투표했고, 반면에 40대와(50.8%) 50대 유권자의(65.5%) 다수는 이회창에 투표했다.

12. (미분류) 2002년 선거 결과를 지역별로 검토하면 남서부(호남)과 남동부(영남)는 1997년 대선 상황과 거의 똑같이 투표했다. 2002년 갤럽코리아 자료에 의하면 93.2%의 호남 유권자는 노무현에게 투표했는데 이는 1997년에 김대중에 투표한 94.4%의 호남 유권자와 거의 동일한 수치다. 2002년에 75.5%의 영남 유권자는 이회창에 투표했는데 1997년에 그에게 투표한 66.9%와 비교된다. (주석: 이는 전 한나라당 후보인 이인제에 대한 표를 포함하지 않았다. 이인제가 경선에서 패배한 뒤에 새 정치 정당을 결성해 따로 출마한 까닭에 그의 득표 대부분은 만일 이인제가 출마하지 않았다면 이회창에게 돌아갔을 표다. 주석 끝.)

13. (미분류) 그러나 영남의 젊은 유권자들은 2002년 지역적 구도보다는 세대 구도에 가까운 투표를 한 점은 주목할 만하다: 20대에선 단 61.1%, 30대에선 단 52.1% 유권자만이 이회창에 투표했다(이회창의 전체 득표율은 75%이고 50대 90.1% 득표율과는 비교된다). 그래서 젊은 유권자들이 나이 든 유권자들보다는 지역적 성향에 따른 영향을 덜 받는 것으로 보인다. 인구통계학적으로 호남은 5,021,528명의 유권자가 있으며 영남은 12,701,303명의 유권자가 있는데, 전체 인구 중 호남의 비중은 10.6%와 영남의 비중은 26.9%를 대표한다.

===== 2007년 대통령 선거 전망 =====

14. (미분류) 김 교수는 20대와 30대 유권자의 분위기는 “갈피를 못 잡고” 있는 상태로 규정하고 있는데, 이는 노무현 정부가 진정한 개혁을 이룩하지 못한 데서 기인한다. 유권자들이 대통령 후보감 박근혜에 대해 어떻게 반응할지 묻자 김 교수는 만일 그녀가 좋은 “이미지” 정치를 계속해서 잘 실행한다면 인터넷 세대 유권자의 마음을 얻을 수 있다는 견해를 피력하였다. 젊은 유권자들은 감성적으로 반응하지, 꼭 이성적으로 반응하지 않는다고 그는 설명했다. 그들은 그녀 부친의 독재 정권에 대해서는 무시할 것이며, 그가 한국에서 일궈낸 경제 기적에 초점을 맞출 것이다. 만일 박근혜와 이명박이 서로 맞대결한다면 구세대의 표가 갈릴 것이다. “좋았던 옛 시절”에 대한 향수를 따라 박근혜를 지지하거나 그녀보다는 더 의지력이 강하다고 여겨지는 이명박을 지지하거나 둘 중에 하나다.

15. (미분류) 2002년 대선을 통해 얻은 교훈은 소화를 잘했다. 두 가지가 특히 주목할 만하다. 첫째, 과학 기술의 도움을 받은 2002년 득표 전략 중 일부는 제도화되었고 2007년 선거에서 표준이 될 공산이 크다. 특히 최신 기술에 정통한 한국 젊은이들이 갈수록 투표 연령에 도달할 것이기 때문이다. 둘째, 정치가들은 계속 젊은 세대를 상대로 구애를 펼칠 것이다―단지 그들이 인구통계학상으로 가장 규모 있는 집단일 뿐만 아니라 2002년 대선이 미친 충격 때문이기도 한다. 한국의 정당들은 젊은 세대가 2002년 지방 선거와 재보궐 선거에서 사용한 기술 전략의 중 일부를 이미 수용한 상태다.

===== 논평 =====

16. (미분류) 다른 어떤 선거보다도 2002년 대선에서 젊은 세대가 미친 충격은 컸다. 비록 언론 매체가 젊은 세대의 혁명에 관해 이야기를 과장했을 수 있지만, 2002년 선거에서 세대 별 차이는 젊은 유권자가 지역별 구도 보다는 세대별 구도를 따라서 투표하는 경향이 있다고 보는 게 타당한 듯하다.
스탠튼
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3170|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 바깥고리 =====
  - [[http://www.poweroftruth.net/news/mainView.php?uid=542|[집중분석] 16~18대 수도권 선거결과 통해 본 ‘야권 숨은표’의 실체]] //진실의길//
===== 원본 다운로드 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL3170.rtf>
UNCLAS SEOUL 003170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PREL [External Political Relations], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: WILL THE YOUNGER GENERATIONS ELECT THE NEXT KOREAN 
PRESIDENT? 
 
 
¶1.    (U) SUMMARY:  Historically, regionalism has played an 
important role in Korean presidential elections.  But in 
2002, young voters successfully mobilized and helped Roh 
Moo-hyun edge out Lee Hoi-chang by a 2.2 percent margin.  The 
media had a frenzy touting the "youth revolution," and the 
data seems to back that up.  Upon closer analysis of regional 
voting statistics, young voters appeared to be less 
influenced by regional tendencies than the older voters.  In 
addition, the technology-aided mobilization practices that 
younger voters used in 2002 have become the norm for 
elections.  But the next presidential election in December 
2007 will be the true test of whether the "youth revolution" 
was indeed a revolution.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.    (U) Regionalism in South Korea -- particularly in the 
southwest (Honam) and southeast (Yeongnam) -- is notorious; 
voters not only choose their hometown candidates, but they 
often vote against candidates from the rival region.  This 
was one reason why Kim Young-sam (Yeongnam) and Kim Dae-jung 
(Honam) publicly pledged not to run against each other in the 
1987 presidential elections, because they knew their regions 
would split the opposition voters.  (NOTE: Despite their 
promise, they ran against each other anyway, and their 
regions voted exactly as expected -- which gave ruling party 
candidate Roh Tae-woo the presidency.  END NOTE.)  However, 
after the impact the younger generations made on the 2002 
presidential elections, the press speculated that Koreans 
were starting to vote more along generational lines than 
strictly regional ones. 
 
DEFINING THE GENERATIONS 
------------------------ 
 
¶3.    (U) The Korean War was the event that defined today's 
older generation in Korea.  Ideologically, those who were old 
enough to remember the Korean War tend to be strongly 
anti-Communist and staunchly pro-American.  They also tend to 
view North Koreans as enemies and hold strong opinions about 
how to deal with the North Korean regime.  Politically and 
socially, this generation is conservative.  Economically, 
those over 50 tend to subscribe to the "growth first" 
ideology, which prioritized economic growth over everything 
else, including human rights.  Demographically, those aged 50 
and older make up 24 percent of the population (11,387,000 
people), per November 2005 census figures released by the 
National Statistics Office. 
 
¶4.    (U) Much has been written about Korea's 386 Generation: 
those who are in their 30s, went to college in the 80s, and 
were born in the 60s.  (NOTE: This moniker first appeared in 
the 1990s, so most people of this are now in their 40s.  END 
NOTE.)  The two defining events for this generation were the 
Gwangju Massacre and the democratic movement in the 1980s. 
Although young at the time, this generation experienced the 
Park Chung-hee authoritarian regime in the 1960s and 1970s, 
then demonstrated against associated military regimes in the 
1980s.  The student demonstrators also urged immediate 
reunification with North Korea and often joined forces in 
solidarity with the labor unions.  Ideologically, the 386 
Generation is characterized by being anti-American and 
sometimes pro-North Korean; it rejects traditional models of 
power and politics, such as old-school networking. 
Politically, this generation is the most progressive and 
active.  Economically, it does not embrace the growth first 
ideology like those over 50; it prioritizes human rights over 
economic growth.  Demographically, those in their 30s and 40s 
are a big group, representing 34 percent of the population. 
 
¶5.    (U) Many of the 386 Generation have moved into 
positions where they can influence politics or public 
opinion.  A few, such as prominent 386 leader Im Jong-seok, 
are now lawmakers.  President Roh, who defended many student 
demonstrators during the 1980s, has surrounded himself with 
advisors who were demonstrators as students.  Sociology 
professor Park Kyung-tae of Sungkonghoe University told 
poloff that many 386ers also became journalists and TV news 
producers.  Their positions of influence dictate the 
sociopolitical conversations and explain some of the more 
progressive story topics. 
 
¶6.    (U) The 20-something generation (or Generation-C) is 
the first Korean generation with no mature memory of an 
authoritarian regime.  Generation C grew up after Korea 
 
became democratized and takes free press for granted.  As a 
result, they are sometimes apathetic politically.  This 
generation is also called Generation C because they are so 
wired.  (NOTE: the "C" can stand for cyber, computer, or 
community.  END NOTE.)  Although not an event per se, the 
Internet boom defines this generation above all else.  Young 
Koreans embraced social-networking blog sites (such as 
Cyworld, comparable to MySpace or Facebook and recently 
introduced in the U.S.) much earlier than their counterparts 
in the U.S., thanks in part to the proliferation of broadband 
Internet (NOTE: Nearly 80 percent of Korean households have 
high-speed, broadband Internet, according to Ministry of 
Information and Communication June 2006 data.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶7.    (U) Ideologically, Generation C tends to be more 
conservative than the 386 Generation, but resists being 
identified with a particular ideology.  Generation C cannot 
be identified as anti-American (although many participated in 
anti-American demonstrations after two young schoolgirls were 
accidentally killed by USFK soldiers in 2002).  They are not 
unquestioningly anti-North Korean like the older generation, 
nor as pro-North Korean as the 386.  Economically, this 
generation takes a developed society for granted.  However, 
because it experienced the Asian financial crisis of the late 
90s, it has a complicated view of money, at times careless 
about consumerism and conservative about saving. Those in 
their 20s are also characterized as being self-centered and 
individualistic, as opposed to the other generations' 
tendency toward more socially responsible outlook. 
Demographically, those in their 20s make up 15.5 percent of 
the population, or 7,334,000 potential voters.  Those who are 
currently 15-19 represent 6.5 percent of the population; 
those in this group who will turn 19 before the December 2007 
election will be able to vote. 
 
USING TECHNOLOGY TO MOBILIZE YOUNG VOTERS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.    (U) Generation C and the 386 Generation were credited 
with electing Roh Moo-hyun as president.  This is due in part 
to their mastery of Internet and cell phone technology to 
mobilize voters.  When former candidate Chung Mong-jun 
withdrew support of Roh the night before the election, people 
posted messages on Web sites and sent cell phone text 
messages urging people to maintain support for Roh.  This 
mobilized youngsters to vote and also changed the minds of 
people who had been planning on voting for the Democratic 
Labor Party candidate, Kwon Young-ghil.  Roh ended up 
defeating Lee Hoi-chang by a mere 2.2% margin, or 570,980 
votes.  The Internet was also credited with politicizing 
people who would otherwise be apathetic, because "netizens" 
are exposed more frequently to political Web sites. 
 
¶9.    (U) One media tool in particular that helped facilitate 
the mobilization was OhmyNews, an online news site where 
netizen reporters can write their own articles, which are 
then fact-checked by staff before posting.  This Web site was 
created by 386er Oh Yeon-ho, who has said, "My generation, 
the 386 generation, were (sic) in the streets fighting in the 
80s against the military dictatorship.  Now, 20 years later, 
we are combat-ready with our Internet."  OhmyNews is where 
many netizens submitted articles urging people to get out the 
vote. 
 
¶10.   (U) After the 2002 election, the media widely reported 
that "generationalism" had the potential to overcome 
regionalism in Korean politics.  A Joong-Ang Ilbo survey 
conducted in late 2002 found that 48.8 percent of those in 
their 20s and 30s had voted for Roh for the sake of a 
"replacement of generations" or "generational transfer." 
Critics have remarked that the media may have fabricated a 
myth of generational conflict where none actually existed. 
 
GENERATION VS. REGION 
--------------------- 
 
¶11.   (U) Analyzing national election results by age, the 
generations appear to have voted along their ideological and 
political tendencies.  The majority of people in their 20s 
(62 percent) and 30s (60.2 percent) voted for Roh, while the 
majority of people in their 40s (50.8 percent) and 50s  (65.5 
percent) voted for Lee. 
 
¶12.   (U) Examining the 2002 election results by region, one 
sees that the southwest (Honam) and southeast (Yeongnam) 
voted almost exactly as they did in the 1997 presidential 
elections.  According to Gallup Korea data, in 2002, 93.2 
percent of voters in Honam voted for Roh, which is nearly 
identical to the 94.4 percent of Honam voters who voted for 
Kim Dae-jung in 1997.  In 2002, 75.5 percent of people in 
Yeongnam voted for Lee Hoi-chang, compared with 66.9 percent 
who voted for him in 1997.  (NOTE: This does not include 
votes for Rhee In-je, a former GNP candidate.  After he lost 
in the primaries, he formed a new political party to run 
separately, so most of his votes would have gone to Lee if 
Rhee didn't run.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶13.  (U) However, it is noteworthy that younger voters in the 
Yeongnam region voted closer to generational lines than 
regional ones in 2002: only 61.1 percent of people in their 
20s and 52.1 percent of voters in their 30s voted for Lee 
(compared to 75.5 percent for Lee overall and 90.1 percent 
for those aged 50 ).  So it appears that younger voters were 
less influenced by their region's tendencies than older 
voters.  Demographically, Honam has 5,021,548 people and 
Yeongnam has 12,701,303 people, representing 10.6 percent and 
26.9 percent respectively of the entire population. 
 
OUTLOOK FOR 2007 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶14.   (U) Professor Kim characterized the current voter mood 
among those in their 20s and 30s as "confused," due to the 
failure of the Roh Administration to achieve real reform. 
Asked to speculate on how voters would react to Park Geun-hye 
as a presidential candidate, Professor Kim opined that she 
could win Generation C's vote if she continues to play good 
"image" politics.  Younger voters react emotionally, not 
necessarily rationally, he explained.  They will ignore her 
father's authoritarian regime and focus on the economic 
miracle he achieved in Korea.  If Park and Lee Myung-bak were 
to run against each other, he predicted that the older 
generation would split the vote between Park, out of 
nostalgia for the "good old days," and Lee, who it perceived 
as having stronger will than Park. 
 
¶15.   (U) Lessons from the 2002 election have been 
well-digested.  Two in particular are noteworthy.  First, 
some of the technology-aided mobilization tactics from the 
2002 elections have been institutionalized and will likely 
become standard practice for the 2007 elections, particularly 
as more tech-savvy young Koreans come to voting age.  Second, 
politicians will continue to court the younger generation -- 
not only because they are the largest group demographically, 
but also because of the impact they made in 2002.  The 
political parties have already embraced some of the 
technology tactics that the younger generation used in the 
2002 elections in the local and by-elections. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶16.   (U) The younger generations impacted the 2002 
presidential election more than any other election.  Although 
the media may have exaggerated stories about the youth 
revolution and the generational differences in the 2002 
elections, there seems to have been a legitimate trend of 
young voters voting along generational, rather than regional, 
lines. 
 
STANTON
</file>