====== 한국, 노동 입법의 기로에 서 ======

작성일 : 2006년 9월 7일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003064 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV PREL KS
SUBJECT: KOREA AT CROSSROADS WITH LABOR LEGISLATION 


Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun. Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 

SUMMARY 
------- 
요약
9월 2일 회의 후에, 한국 노사정위원회는 회의 핵심참석자 몇몇이 사업장에서 복수 노동조합 설립을 5년간 금지하기로 합의했다고 발표했다. 하지만 노조 전임자에게는 회사가 계속해 급여를 지급하도록 허용하기로 했다고 밝혔다. 노사정 모두가 합의에 이를 때까지 아무 것도 최종적인 합의일 수는 없지만, 복수노조 금지 연장 가능성은 노동부의 힘이 별로라는 점을 보여준다. 복수 노조는 금지는 거의 10년 동안 잠정 형태로 유지되고 있다. 시애틀에서 3차 FTA 협상의 열리는 가운데 이는 미국 협상단에게 잘못된 신호를 보내는 것이다. 미국 협상단들은 한국 노동부가 좀 더 공세적으로 사업장의 자유와 관련한 법들을 제안하고 지지할 것으로 기대하고 있다. 

¶1. (C) Following a meeting on September 2, the Korean 
Tripartite Commission (KTC) announced that several of the key 
players at the meeting agreed to a five-year ban on multiple 
trade unions in the workplace while continuing to allow the 
provision of salaries by companies to full-time unionists. 
Although nothing is final until all of the parties to the 
commission reach an agreement, the mere possibility of 
extending the ban on multiple unions, which has already been 
in a holding pattern for almost ten years, marks a low point 
in the power wielded by the Ministry of Labor. In the midst 
of the third round of FTA negotiations in Seattle, it also 
sends the wrong signal to U.S. negotiators who are looking 
for the Ministry of Labor to more aggressively propose and 
support laws relating to workplace freedoms. END SUMMARY. 

BACKGROUND ON TRIPARTITE COMMISSION 
----------------------------------- 
노사정 위원회 배경
9월 2일 정부의 새 개혁 계획에 대한 제 10차 노사정 위원회가 열렸다. 정부와, 경영자, 노동자들을 대표해, 협상단들은 노동 입법과 관련한 문제들을 타결하는데 책임이 있다. 국회로 입법안이 넘어가기 전에 각자의 입장이 새로운 입법에 반영되도록 하는 것이 한편으로는 그들의 책임이다. 이 위원회의 정통성은 과거 한국에서 가장 2개의 노동단체 가운데 하나(민노총)이 1999년 위원회에서 탈퇴함으로써 의문시되기도 했다. 민노총은 정부가 노동조합에 대해 좀 더 엄격한 통제력을 행사하려는 흐름을 감지한 뒤에 탈퇴했다. 노동자쪽을 대표하는 협상자들은 지난주 다른 대규모 노동단체인 한국노총이 부산에서 열린 국제노동기구의 14차 아시아지역 회의에서 철수했을 때 유사한 타격을 받고 씨름해야 했다. 국제노동기구 회의에서 철수가 널리 알려지기는 했지만, 이들은 9월 2일 회의에 참석함으로써 많은 사람들을 놀라게 했다. 
¶2. (U) On Saturday September 2, the 10th tripartite meeting 
of the government's new reform plan was held. Representing 
government, management, and labor, delegates to the 
Commission are responsible to hammer-out issues relating to 
labor legislation while getting their respective constituents 
to buy into the new legislation before it goes to the 
National Assembly for a formal vote. The legitimacy of the 
Commission has been called into question in the past after 
one of the two largest trade unions (Korean Confederation of 
Trade Unions, or KCTU) withdrew from the Commission in 1999 
following the perceived trend by the government toward 
stricter controls over unions. Labor negotiators were dealt 
a similar blow last week when the other large trade union, 
Federation of Korean Trade Unions (FKTU), withdrew from the 
14th Asian regional meeting of the International Labor 
Organization being held in Busan Korea. Despite FKTU's 
widely publicized withdrawal from the ILO meeting, they 
surprised many by showing up for the tripartite meeting on 
September 2. 

CORE ISSUES 
----------- 
핵심 문제들
이번 회의에서 중심적인 두 가지 이슈는 사업장에서 복수의 노조가 허용돼야 하느냐는 문제와 노조 전임자가 임금을 지급받아야 하는가의 문제이다. 1997년 통과된 법에 따라 1개 이상의 노조가 허용된다. 그러나 이 법이 통과된 이후 시행은 중지된 상태이다. 복수 노조 조치에 대한 첫 5년간의 유예는 2002년에 끝났다. 이 때부터 다시 2007년까지 5년간 유예가 연장됐다. 이 조치는 올해 말에 끝날 예정인데, 기본적으로 1개 이상의 노조와 협상을 해야 하는 상황이어서 사용자측은 점차 이에 대해 불편해하고 있다. (한국의 노조들은 파업과 태업에 의존하는 경향으로 알려져 있다. 이는 사용자로부터 상대적으로 큰 임금 상승과 다른 양보를 받아내기 위한 노력의 일환이다) 현대 자동차 노사관계 담당인 곽성수 전무는 우리들에게 현대자동차에 1개 이상의 노조가 있을 수 있다는 개념에 대해 개인적으로 걱정하지 않지만, 현대 회장은 비싼 값을 치르는 노조와 협상에 또 한 해를 더 보내야 하는데 우려하고 있다고 말했다. 곽은 2개의 노조 사이에서 선택해야 하는 상황에서 대부분의 회사들은 더 큰 노조와 보조를 맞춤으로써 2개 혹은 그 이상의 협상 대상이 생길 가능성을 제한하려 할 것이라고 믿고 있다. 


¶3. (SBU) The two issues at the heart of the current meetings 
are whether multiple labor unions should be allowed in the 
workplace and whether full-time union employees should 
continue to be on the payroll of the employer. Following a 
law passed in 1997, more than one trade union is allowed in 
the workplace although the law has been on hold since it was 
passed. The first five-year moratorium on multiple unions 
ended in 2002 at which time it was extended for another five 
years until 2007. With the current ban set to expire at the 
end of this year, employers have been growing uneasy at the 
prospect of having to deal with more than one labor union on 
a regular basis. (NOTE: Labor unions in Korea are known for 
their tendency to strike or slow down production in an effort 
to extract relatively large pay increases and other 
concessions from employers. END NOTE). Kwak Sung-soo, 
General Manager of Labor Relations at the Hyundai Motors 
Corporation, told poloff that although he was not personally 
concerned about the notion of more than one trade union 
within Hyundai, the Hyundai chairman was concerned following 
yet another year of costly labor negotiations. Kwak believes 
that given the choice between two unions, most employees 
would align with the larger union thereby limiting the 
likelihood of having two or more unions as negotiating 
partners. 

두 번째 문제는 한국의 사용자들에게는 기본 관행과 관계돼 있다. 즉 노조에서 전임으로 일하는 직원들에게 계속해서 임금을 지급해야 하는 것이다. 이런 상황은 사용자에게 무거운 금융 부담을 지울 뿐만 아니라, 노조 전임 근로자들이 노조원들에게 충성해야 하는 것도 의문을 불러일으킨다. 포스코 노사관계팀의 허태구 팀장은 그의 회사에는 180명의 직원 당 1명꼴로 노조 전임자가 있다고 말했다. 포스코는 한국에서 가장 큰 강철회사이다. 허태구가 캘리포니아에 있는 포스코의 연합공장을 방문했을 때, 그는 직원 대 노조 근무자의 비율이 800대 1인 것을 보고 놀랐다. 한국에서 노조 전임사자 숫자가 많은 점을 고려할 때, 사용자의 금융 부담은 상당한 것이다. 사용자들은 노조 전임자들에게 재정적인 이유로 임금을 지급하지 않으려 해왔음에도 불구하고, 노조들은 이를 사용자들이 노조의 활동과 힘을 제한하려는 시도라고 주장해왔다. 


¶4. (SBU) The second issue relates to the standard practice 
throughout Korea for employers to continue paying the 
salaries of workers who take full-time positions with a 
union. Not only does this arrangement place a heavy 
financial burden upon the employer but it also calls into 
question the allegiance of the full-time union workers to the 
rank and file union members. Her Tae Goo, the leader of the 
Labor Relations Team at POSCO, the largest steel manufacturer 
in Korea, said that there is one full-time union 
representative for every 180 workers at his plant. When Her 
visited POSCO's joint operation located in California, he was 
astounded that the ratio of workers to union officers there 
was 800:1. Given the large number of full-time unionists in 
Korea, the financial burden on the employers is substantial. 
Although employers are looking to drop union workers from the 
payroll for financial reasons, unions portray the action as 
an attempt by employers to limit the activities and strength 
of the unions. 

RESULTS OF LATEST TRIPARTITE MEETING 
------------------------------------ 
최근 노사정 위원회 회의의 결과들
가장 최근의 노사정위원회 회의에서 잠정적인 합의가 이뤄졌는데, 이는 한국노총과 한국경영자협회, 그리고 상공회의소 멤버들이 복수노조 유예를 또 다시 5년 연장하기로 한 잠정 합의이다. 이는 오로지 노조를 위해서만 일하는 노조 전임 근무자에 대한 임금 지급을 계속하기로 하면서 맞바꾼 것이다. 민노총은 눈에 띄게도 협상에 나오지 않았는데 그들은 이번 합의는 “임시적인 해법”으로 이를 지지할 수 없다고 말했다. 9월 7일은 노동부가 새 법을 입법 예고한 날로 기록되는데,노사정 위원회 위원들은 합의를 조속히 이뤄내야 한다는 많은 압력을 받고 있다. 아마도 이런 압력 때문에 이상수 노동부 장관은 지난 주 그는 정부, 노조, 경영자 사이의 관계 개선을 위한 로드맵 도입을 목표로 하는 새 법을 밀어붙이겠다고 발표했다. 3자가 로드맵 초안을 타결하는데 실패하더라도 상관없이 법을 밀어붙이겠다는 것이었다. 처음 이 같은 사실을 발표한 뒤, 이장관은 입법 예고를 합의의 조짐이 있다면 9월 7일에서 하루 더 늦출 수 있다고 살짝 물러서는 모양새를 취했다. 

¶5. (SBU) In the most recent tripartite meeting, a tentative 
deal was struck between the labor contingent consisting of 
FKTU and the Korean Employer's Federation (KEF) and the 
management contingent represented by the Korean Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry (KCCI) to extend the moratorium on 
multiple unions for another five years. This was a trade-off 
for continuing to allow union employees to remain on the 
payroll of employers while only working for the union. 
Noticeably absent from the negotiations was KCTU who said 
that they cannot support a deal that only represents a 
"temporary solution." With September 7th marked as the date 
when the Ministry of Labor said it would pre-announce the new 
legislation, there is a great deal of pressure on the members 
of the commission to quickly come to a consensus. Possibly 
due to this pressure, Minister of Labor Lee Sang-soo 
announced last week that he was planning to push forward with 
legislation aimed at introducing a roadmap for improved ties 
between the government, labor and management, even if the 
three sides failed to produce a compromised draft of the 
roadmap. Since that initial statement, Lee has back-pedaled 
slightly by saying that the Ministry of Labor could delay the 
date of the pre-announcement from September 7th for up to a 
day if there are signs of progress on more clauses in the 
agreement. 
COMMENT 
------- 
코멘트
한국 정부는 어려운 형편에 놓여 있다. 한국의 일반 국민과 다른 나라의 관측자들에게는 약해 보이는, 사측과 노조 사이에 타결되고 있는 현재의 합의안을 지원해야 하는가 하는 입장에 처해있는 것이다. 정부에게 최선의 시나리오는 민노총이 더욱 강력하게 잠정 타결안에 대해 반대하는 목소리를 내면서 타결안을 매장시킴으로써, 노동부는 어느 한쪽 편을 들지 않아도 되도록 하는 것이다. 노동부 대변인은 9월 3일 다음과 같은 발표를 했다: “우리는 입법 예고를 더 이상 미룰 수 없다. 개혁안은 올해 안에 입법화돼야 한다. 합의가 이뤄지지 않은 문제들은 국회에서 더 상세히 다뤄질 수 있다.” 이런 논평에 바탕을 두고, 노동부는 이 문제를 국회에 넘기는 선택을 할 수도 있다. 이렇게 함으로써 필요하지만 인기가 없는 양보를 했다는 데 쏟아지는 비난을 국회가 감내하도록 하는 것이다.
¶6. (C) The ROKG is in a difficult position, caught between 
supporting the current deal that is being brokered between 
management and labor while appearing weak to the general 
Korean population and international observers. The best-case 
scenario for the government would be if KCTU were to speak 
out more aggressively against the tentative deal and 
rendering it dead on arrival, thereby relieving the Labor 
Ministry from having to choose sides. A spokesman for the 
Ministry of Labor made the following announcement on 
September 3: "We cannot afford a longer delay for the 
pre-announcement as the reform bill has to be legislated 
within this year. The issues on which agreement is not 
reached can be discussed further at the National Assembly." 
Based on this comment, the Ministry of Labor may choose to 
pass the buck to the National Assembly and let them bear the 
brunt of any unpopular concessions that may be necessary. 
END COMMENT. 
VERSHBOW 
