^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL4233  |  2006-12-12 05:41  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PARM PREL MNUC KNNP KN KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 미 대사, 김장수 국방장관 첫 예방 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 004233
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))
국방부망 배포
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 10/10/2016
태그: PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), MNUC(([Military Nuclear Applications])), KNNP(([Nuclear Non-Proliferation])), KN(([Korea (North)])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 미 대사, 김장수 국방장관 첫 예방
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사 근거 1.4 (b/d).
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/22 20:08//

===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점: 12월 11일 대사는 한국의 신임 국방장관 김장수 장군의 사무실을 방문한 자리에서: 

  * 대사는 국방부의 수장으로 승격한 그에게 축하하면서, 한미동맹 이슈 관련해 긴밀한 협조를 지속하길 고대한다고 말하였다.

  * 김 장관은 한미동맹에 대한 강력한 지지 목소리를 냈으며, 미군 변환을 진척시키기 위해 대사관과 주한미군과의 긴밀한 협력을 공언하였다. 그는 미군의 변환이 한국군에 끼칠 영향에 대해 미국 정부가 유념해 달라고 요청하였다((번역 주: 미국측에서는 ‘변혁’이라고 번역한다. ‘미군의 재배치’ 혹은 '전략적 유연성'을 말하는 것이다.))

  * 김장수는 국회 안에서 한국군의 이라크 철수를 두고 심각한 논쟁이 있지만, 한국정부는 2007년까지 한국군 파병을 연장할 거라고 대사를 안심시켰다. 대사는 한국군의 강력한 헌신에 감사하였고, 자이툰 부대가 이뤄낸 값진 성과를 칭송하였다.

  * 두 사람은 작전통제권 이양에 대한 정확한 날짜를 잡는 게 중요하다는데 견해를 같이하였다. 그러나 김 장관은 전작권 책임에 대한 대책과 준비가 필요하다고 강조하였다. 그는 이양 시기에 관한 결정은 군 지도자들이 아닌 정치 지도자들에 의해 결정될 거라고 주의를 당부하였다.

  * 김 장관은 직도 공대지 사격 연습장이 2007년 2월에 전면 가동될 거라고 낙관하였고, 과도기적으로 필승 사격장을 주한미군이 사용하도록 “충분히 위임”하였다고 주장하였다.

  * 김장수는 2007~2009년 방위비 분담 특별협정 협상에 대한 미국의 불만족으로 말미암아 주한미군이 한반도 병력을 감축할 것을 염려하였다. 한국이 방위비 분담비용에서 한층 균등한 몫을 맡아가는 하나의 단계로써 미국정부가 이번 방위비 분담 협정을 견지할 것을 촉구하였다.

  * 대사는 한국의 전면적인 대량살상무기 확산방지구상 참여를 독려하였고, 한국정부의 화물안전구상에((Secure Freight Initiative, SFI)) 대한 한국정부의 참여 결정을 환영하였다.

  * 김 장관은 취임식 이후에 가능한 한 조속히 워싱턴을 방문해서 국무부 장관과 회동하고 싶다고 말하였다. 그는 게이츠 국방장관의 추가적인 대한민국 방문도 환영하였다. 요점 끝.

2. (기밀) 2006년 12월 11일 대사는 새로 부임한 한국 국방장관 김장수 장군을 방문하였다. 김 장관은 그가 11월 24일 취임한 이후에 첫 방문객으로 맞은 외국 당국자가 버시바우 대사라고 언급하였다. 버시바우 대사는 국방부 수장으로 발탁된 그를 축하하였고, 한미 동맹 사안 관련해 국방 장관과의 긴밀한 협의를 지속하길 고대한다고 말하였다. 버시바우 대사는 김 장군이 한미연합사령부의 부사령관과 한국 육군참모총장이란(2004~2005) 예전 보직 때문에 미국 당국자들에게 친숙한 인사라고 언급하였다. 우리는 국방부를 훌륭한 분이 맡게 되었음을 안다고 버시바우 대사는 말하였다.

3. 김 장관은 버시바우 대사에 평가에 감사하였다. 김장수는 한미동맹의 지지하는 내용을 담긴 미 대사의 최근 몇몇 연설을 언급하였고, 그의 발언에 크게 감사하였다. 김장수 장관은 주한미군과 협력했던 그의 과거 경험은 한미동맹 전반의 안녕에 긍정적인 영향을 미칠 거라고 예견하였다. 그는 동맹 변환을 진척시키기 위해 대사관과 주한미군과 긴밀히 협력하기로 서약하였다. 

===== 동맹 변환 =====

4. (기밀) 김장수 국방장관은 미군 변환 문제를 제기하였는데, 미군의 군사 변화의 필요성에 동의하지만, 그 변화가 한국군에 미칠 영향에 대해 유념해야 할 필요가 있다고 언급하였다. 미군과 한국군의 변환은 다 같이 상부상조하는 각본이라는데 버시바우 대사와 김 장관은 동의하였다. 대사는 자신의 낙관론은 한국의 야심 찬 국방계획 2020에서 일부 기인한다고 말하였다. 대사는 동 국방계획은 자체 방위부대의 역량과 기술력, 그리고 준비태세 수준의 향상을 한층 강화하겠다는 강력한 의지를 증명한다고 했다. 버시바우 대사는 이라크와 아프간, 그리고 레바논 등 세계 곳곳에서의 활동에 대한 남한의 기꺼운 지원에 대해 역시 감사를 표명하였고, 한국은 진정한 전 세계적인 동반자라고 하였다.

===== 이라크 파병 연장 =====

5. (기밀) 김 장관은 한국은 그의 말을 빌리자면 “세계 무대에서 미합중국과 함께할만한 건실한 노력”을 해왔다고 대사에게 말하였다. 그러나 국회의원 다수와 남한 대중들은 자이툰 부대의 파병을 2007년까지 연장하는 한국정부의 계획에 동의하지 않는다고 그는 인정하였다. 강력한 반대가 있지만, 한국정부는 “자이툰 부대의 철수를 입 밖에도 꺼내지 않겠다”고 대사에게 말하였다. 그는 내년에는 한국 파병부대의 축소가 있을 거라고 예견하였지만, 한국은 2007년까지 에르빌 주둔을 유지할 작정이라고 대사를 안심시켰다. 국가적인 토론 과정에서, 이라크와 여타 국방비 지출을 두고 국회의 질의에 맞서 국방부의 국방예산 증액 요구를 방어하는데 가중된 어려움에 맞서야만 해왔다고 김장수는 덧붙였다.

6. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 국방부가 이라크에서 지속적으로 헌신해 준 점에 감사하였다. 버시바우 대사는 자이툰 부대의 활약과 자이툰 부대가 이라크 북부에서 운영 중인 널리 인정받는 기술 직업훈련 프로그램의 성공에 대해 칭송하였고, 또한, 자이툰 부대의 활약이 지속하여야 하는 게 얼마나 중요한지 강조하였다.

===== 전작권 이양 =====

7. (기밀) 한국으로 전시 작전통제권을 이양하는 주제에 관하여 버시바우 대사는 이 문제가 2007년 한국 대통령 선거에서 정치적으로 말려들기 전에 진척을 이룰 필요가 있다고 강조하였다. 버시바우 대사는 전작권 이양은 한미동맹의 미래를 위해 올바른 결정이라고 말하였다. 미 대사는 미국과 한국이 정확한 이양 날짜에 대해 합의를 이뤄내도록 할 필요를 강조하였고, 확정 날짜가 정해진 이후에 전작권 문제에 대한 정치적인 불안감은 사라질 거라고 예견하였다.

8. (기밀) 김 국방장관은 전적으로 동의한다고 말하였고, 확정 날짜에 대해 공감대를 이루게 된다면 양국에 상호 이득이 될 거라고 말하였다. 그러나 전시 작전통제권을 환수할 준비를 하기 위해서 마련돼야 할 대책들을 고려하는 일 역시 중요하다고 강조하였다. 김 장관은 대부분의 이양 작업이 미국과 한국군 전문가들에 의해 실현될 것이지만, 작전통제권 이양 날짜는 양국의 군 지도자들이 아닌 정치 지도자들이 하게 될 거라고 더욱 주의를 당부하였다. 

===== 사격 훈련장 =====

9. (기밀) 대사는 전임 윤 국방장관이 직도 공대지 사격 훈련장의 완공을 위해서 그간 수행한 역할에 대해 감사를 표시하였다. 대사는 겨울철 기상 여건으로 직도 사격 연습장 시설의 완성이 현재 지연되는 모양새임을 고려할 때, 과도기적으로 적절한 사격 훈련장에 대한 주한미군의 접근성을 보장하도록 김 장관의 도움을 요청하였다김 장관은 사격장 문제에 대한 “상호 이해와 상호 인내”에 대해 미국 측에 감사하였다. 김장수는 매우 혹독한 기상 여건을 차치하고 직도 사격장은 2007년 2월에 전면 가동될 거라고 낙관하면서, 그 와중에 필승 사격장은 주한미군이 사용하도록 “충분하게 위임되어” 왔다고 말하였다. 김 장관은 만일 주한미군이 추가로 훈련 요구 사항이 있다면, 한국 합동 참모 본부에 그 내용을 충분히 다뤄줄 것을 지시하겠다고 말하였다.

===== 방위비 분담 특별협정 =====

10. (기밀) 대사와 김 장관은 다 같이 최근에 협상이 완료된 방위비 분담 특별협정의 결과는 미합중국에 완전히 만족스럽지 않은 결과라고 인정하였다. 김 장관은 그렇긴 하지만 주한미군의 비인적 주둔 비용에 대해 한국이 한층 균등한 분담으로 한 단계 나아간 것으로 미국정부가 이해해 주길 희망한다고 말하였다. 김장수는 주한미군이 이번 방위비 분담 협정의 결과 부족분으로 말미암아 한반도 주둔군을 줄이게 될지 우려를 표명하며, 미국이 불만이 있어도 미군 병력을 현 수준으로 유지하는 게 중요하다고 말하였다. 대사는 군 구조상의 변화는 필요치 않길 역시 희망한다고 대답하였으나, 조정이 필요할 수도 있다고 김 장관에게 경고하였다. 그러나 버시바우 대사는 어떤 조정이 있더라도 미군 군사력의 감축 없이, 그리고 한미동맹에 대한 미국의 헌신이 경감되지 않는 상태에서 수행될 거라고 김 장관을 안심시켰다. 김 장관은 10월 북한의 핵 실험, 12월 6자회담의 소생 전망에 비추어 그렇게 하는 게 극히 중요하다고 견해를 같이하였다. 

===== 대량살상무기 확산방지구상 =====

11. (기밀) 대사는 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(이하 PSI)과 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호 전면 이행과 관련해 한국과 긴밀히 공조하는 게 미국의 희망이라고 강조하였다. 김 장관은 한국정부는 PSI의 //“목적과 원칙”//을 지지한다고 대답하였고, PSI 8개항 중에 <wrap hi>6개항 협력 분야에서 충분하게 참여를</wrap> 할 거라고 대답하였다. 김장수는 화물안전구상 참여에 한국정부가 합의한 점은 더 좋은 뉴스가 될 거로 생각한다고 덧붙였다.
<WRAP info center round 90%>
//** 참여 정부는 애초에 PSI 8개항 중에 5개항에 참여했다고 했지만, 결국 6개항!으로 밝혀져**//
<wrap hi>우리 정부는 현재 PSI 8개항 가운데</wrap> ①기존 한미훈련에 WMD 차단훈련 포함 ②우리 측에 PSI 활동현황을 브리핑할 미측 전문가 접수 ③PSI 운용전문가 그룹의 활동에 관한 복명(復命, debriefing) 청취 ④역외 차단훈련에 참관단 파견 ⑤역내 차단훈련에 참관단 파견 <wrap hi>등 5개항에 협력하고 있다.</wrap> 이번 PSI 참여 확대 문제는 ⑥역외 차단훈련 물적지원(선박, 항공기 등) 제공 ⑦역내 차단훈련 물적지원 제공 ⑧PSI 차단원칙선언 승인을 통한 정식 참여 등 나머지 3개항에 대해서다.―청와대 통일외교안보정책실―[[http://knsi.org/~knsiorg/knsi/admin/work/works/해운합의서엄격적용.hwp|바깥 고리에서 내려받기 가능]]
</WRAP>
===== 워싱턴 방문 =====

12. (기밀) 12. 김 장관은 취임식 이후에 가능한 한 조속히 워싱턴을 방문해서 국무부 장관과 회동하고 싶다고 말하였다. 그는 게이츠 국방장관의 추가적인 대한민국 방문도 환영하였다. 김 장관은 국무장관과의 한미동맹 논의를 고대한다고 말하였고, 자신이 한미 관계를 더욱 공고히 하도록 그가 할 수 있는 모든 일을 하겠다고 대사에게 공언하였다. “현역에서 바로 왔기에, 훌륭한 장관이 되기 위한 정치적인 수완은 부족할 수도 있다.” “그러나 한미동맹에 대해 선의를 가진 점은 안심해도 된다.”라고 김 장군은 말하였다.

//버시바우//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/5/06seoul4233|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL4233.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 004233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2016 
TAGS: PARM [Arms Controls and Disarmament], PREL [External Political Relations], MNUC [Military Nuclear Applications], KNNP [Nuclear Non-Proliferation], KN [Korea (North)], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S INITIAL CALL ON ROK DEFENSE MINISTER 
KIM JANG-SOO 
 
Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  During the Ambassador's December 11 office 
call on the new ROK Defense Minister, General Kim Jang-soo: 
 
-- The Ambassador congratulated him on his elevation to head 
the Ministry of National Defense and said he looked forward 
to continued close consultations on U.S.-ROK Alliance issues. 
 
 
-- Minister Kim voiced strong support for the Alliance and 
vowed to work closely with the Embassy and USFK to further 
its transformation.  He asked the USG to be mindful of the 
impact U.S. military transformation will have on the ROK 
military. 
 
-- He assured the Ambassador that despite a serious debate 
within the National Assembly over withdrawal of ROK forces 
from Iraq, the ROKG would extend its troop dispatch through 
2007.  The Ambassador thanked MND for its strong commitment 
and praised the valuable work being done by its Zaytun unit 
in Irbil. 
 
-- They agreed on the importance of setting a firm date for 
OPCON transfer.  However, Minister Kim stressed that the ROK 
needed to be prepared and ready for that responsibility.  He 
also cautioned that the decision on timing would be made by 
political, not military leaders. 
 
-- Minister Kim was optimistic the Jikdo air-to-surface 
training range would be fully operational by February 2007 
and claimed the Pilsung Range had been "plentifully 
delegated" to USFK for its use in the interim. 
 
-- He expressed concern USFK will downsize its forces on the 
Peninsula as a result of U.S. dissatisfaction with the 
2007-2009 SMA negotiation.  He urged the USG to view the 
agreement as a step toward the ROK assuming a more equal 
share of the burdensharing cost. 
 
-- The Ambassador encouraged fuller ROK participation in PSI 
and welcomed the ROKG decision to join the Secure Freight 
Initiative (SFI). 
 
-- Minister Kim said he would like to visit Washington to 
meet with the SECDEF as soon as possible after his 
swearing-in ceremony.  He also welcomed future visits by 
Secretary Gates to the Republic of Korea.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶2.  (C) On December 11, 2006, the Ambassador paid a visit on 
the newly-installed ROK Minister of National Defense, General 
Kim Jang-soo.  Minister Kim noted that the Ambassador was the 
first foreign official he had met since he was sworn into 
office on November 24.  The Ambassador congratulated him on 
his selection to head MND and said he looked forward to 
continued close consultations with the Ministry on U.S.-ROK 
Alliance issues.  The Ambassador noted General Kim was a 
familiar face to American officials, owing to his previous 
assignments as Deputy Commander of the U.S.-ROK Combined 
Forces Command (2004-2005) and as ROK Army Chief of Staff 
(2005-2006).  We know the Ministry is in very good hands, the 
Ambassador said. 
 
¶3.  (C) Defense Minister Kim thanked the Ambassador for his 
comments.  He cited several speeches the Ambassador had 
recently delivered in support of the Alliance, saying he had 
greatly appreciated his remarks.  The Minister predicted his 
own past experience working with USFK would have a positive 
influence on the overall well-being of the U.S.-ROK Alliance. 
 He vowed to work closely with the Embassy and USFK to 
further Alliance transformation. 
 
ALLIANCE TRANSFORMATION 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Defense Minister Kim raised the issue of U.S. 
military transformation, commenting that while he agreed with 
 
the necessity of U.S. military changes, we needed to be 
mindful of the impact it would have on the ROK armed forces. 
He and the Ambassador agreed that transformation of both the 
U.S. and ROK militaries was a win-win scenario.  The 
Ambassador said his optimism stemmed in part from the ROK's 
ambitious 2020 Defense Reform Plan, which demonstrated the 
South Korean Government's strong commitment to the further 
strengthening of its own defense forces, and the raising of 
its technological capabilities and level of readiness.  He 
also expressed appreciation for South Korea's willingness to 
contribute to operations around the world, in Iraq, 
Afghanistan and Lebanon, noting that the ROK was truly a 
global partner. 
 
IRAQ TROOP RENEWAL 
------------------ 
 
¶5.  (C) Minister Kim told the Ambassador the ROK was making 
what he called "a conscientious effort to stand with the 
United States on the world stage."  However, he acknowledged 
that many in the National Assembly and South Korean populace, 
disagreed with the ROKG's plan to extend its Zaytun troop 
dispatch to Irbil through 2007.  Despite that strong 
opposition, Minister Kim told the Ambassador that the ROKG 
will "not even speak of withdrawing the troops."  He 
predicted there would be a reduction in ROK troop levels over 
the next year, but assured the Ambassador that the ROK is 
committed to retaining its presence in Irbil through 2007. 
Kim added that in the course of the national debate, MND has 
had to face the added difficulty of defending its request for 
increases in its defense budget against questioning by the 
National Assembly over Iraq and other expenditures. 
 
¶6.  (C) The Ambassador thanked MND for its continuing 
commitment in Iraq.  He praised the work of the Zaytun unit, 
and the widely-acknowledged success of the technical 
vocational training program it is operating in the northern 
part of the country, and stressed how important it is that it 
continue. 
 
OPCON TRANSFER 
-------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) On the subject of the transfer of wartime operational 
control (OPCON) to the ROK, the Ambassador stressed the need 
to move ahead on implementation before the issue becomes 
entangled in the politics of the 2007 ROK presidential race. 
He said OPCON transfer is the right decision for the future 
of the Alliance.  He highlighted the need for the U.S. and 
ROK to come to an agreement on a precise date for the 
transfer, predicting that domestic political anxiety over the 
issue would dissipate after a firm date has been set. 
 
¶8.  (C) Defense Minister Kim said he fully agreed, stating it 
would be mutually beneficial for both countries to reach 
consensus on a firm date.  However, he also stressed the 
importance of taking into consideration the preparations that 
the ROK needed to put in place in order to be ready to take 
over the responsibility for wartime operational control.  He 
further cautioned that while most of the work would be 
carried out by U.S. and ROK military experts, the date for 
OPCON transfer would be decided by the political, not the 
military, leaders of both countries. 
 
TRAINING RANGES 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) The Ambassador expressed appreciation for the role 
former Defense Minister Yoon had played in moving the Jikdo 
air-to-surface training range toward completion.  He asked 
Minister Kim for his assistance in ensuring USFK had access 
to adequate training facilities in the interim, given the 
fact that winter weather conditions now appeared to be 
delaying the completion of the Jikdo training facility. 
Minister Kim thanked the U.S. side for its "common 
understanding and common patience" over the issue.  He said 
he was optimistic that the range would be fully operational 
 
by February 2007, barring very severe weather conditions, and 
that the Pilsung Range had been "plentifully delegated" to 
USFK for its use in the interim.  Minister Kim said that if 
USFK had any further training requirements, he would instruct 
his Joint Chiefs of Staff to fully address them. 
 
SMA 
--- 
 
¶10.  (C) The Ambassador and the Minister both acknowledged 
that the outcome of the recently completed Special Measures 
Agreement was not entirely satisfactory to the United States. 
 Kim said he nonetheless hoped the USG understood it as a 
step toward the ROK assuming a more equal share of USFK's 
non-personnel stationing costs.  He expressed concern USFK 
would downsize its forces on the Peninsula as a result of the 
shortfall in the agreement, saying it was important for USFK 
to maintain its current force level despite its 
disappointment.  The Ambassador replied that he too hoped 
that changes in force structure would not be necessary, but 
warned Minister Kim that adjustments might be needed.  He 
assured him, however, that any adjustments would be carried 
out with no diminution of U.S. capabilities and no 
diminishment of the U.S. commitment to the Alliance. 
Minister Kim agreed it was extremely important that be the 
case in light of the October North Korean nuclear test, and 
the revived prospects for the Six-Party Talks later in 
December. 
 
PSI 
--- 
 
¶11.  (C) The Ambassador stressed the U.S. desire to work 
closely with the ROK on Proliferation Security Initiative 
(PSI) activities and full implementation of UNSCR 1718. 
Minister Kim replied that the ROKG supported the "purpose and 
principles" of PSI and would participate fully in 6 of the 8 
PSI areas of cooperation.  He added there was more good news 
to be found in the ROKG's agreement to join the Secure 
Freight Initiative (SFI). 
 
TRAVEL TO WASHINGTON 
-------------------- 
 
¶12.  (C) Defense Minister Kim stated that he would like to 
visit Washington to meet with the SECDEF as soon as possible 
after his swearing-in ceremony.  He also welcomed any future 
visits by Secretary Gates to the Republic of Korea.  Minister 
Kim said he looked forward to discussing U.S.-ROK Alliance 
issues with the Secretary and pledged to the Ambassador that 
he would do all he could to further strengthen U.S.-ROK 
relations.  "Coming directly from active duty, I may lack the 
political finesse to be a good Minister," General Kim said, 
"but rest assured I have the best of intentions toward our 
Alliance." 
VERSHBOW
</file>