^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL4260  |  2006-12-14 08:44  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>KS PREL }}  |
====== 제 목: 한미 동맹 관리―2007년 전망 ======
기 밀 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 004260 
국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
국무부는 미 무역대표부와 상무부에도 전달하세요((STATE ALSO PASS USTR AND COMMERCE ))

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 12/14/2016 
태그: KS(([Korea (South)])), PREL(([External Political Relations]))
제 목: 한미 동맹 관리―2007년 전망
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사  근거 1.4 (b/d) 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/05/01 07:06//
===== 요점 =====
1. (기밀) 다음 대선까지 단 12개월을 남겨둔 상황에서, 노 대통령은 한국 대통령 사상 가장 낮은 지지율 늪에 빠져 있다. 가장 최근 여론조사에 의하면 5.7%이고, 다른 조사에선 15% 미만이다. 지지율을 회복해서 후계자 선택 상에 목소리를 내기 위한 노무현의 몸부림이 내년 정계의 모든 측면에 색채를 더할 것이다. 불가분의 한미 관계도 빠질 수 없다. 미국의 행동이나 여러 발언이 들춰지고 비판받을 것이다. 그리고 한국언론이나 정치권에 의한 과장이나 날조의 양의 평소보다 많아질 것이다. 다음과 같은 쟁점이 “깨지기 쉬워 취급 주의해야 할” 묶음이라 하겠다:
  * 대통령 선거. 미국정부는 한나라당 후보를 선호한다는 사회적 통념과 지속해서 맹렬하게 싸워야만 한다; 최우선 과제는 2002년처럼 미국이 선거 쟁점이 되는 것을 피하는 것인데, 당시 노무현 캠프에서는 주한미군 차량에 사고로 치어 사망한 두 여중생 사건을 악용했었다.

  * 북한. 노 대통령은 유산으로 남기고, 동시에 일부 대중적 지지를 회복할 최선의 기회는 북한 문제에서 “홈런”을 쳐내는 일이라고 계속 믿고 있다. 6자 회담에서 돌파구가 없을 듯하므로, 노무현은 단기적으로나마 남북 정상회담을 꾀해서, 비록 어떤 구체적인 결과물이 부족하더라도, 북한과의 교류협력이 여전히 먹힌다는 것을 증명해 보이는 것이다. 미국의 당면 도전은 남한 정치적 상황의 추이와 별개로 북한의 비핵화를 추구하는 것이며, 또한 6자 회담에서 한국이 대오를 이탈하지 않도록 유지하는 것이다.

  * 한미 FTA. 가장 최근 몬태나 주 논의는 실망스러웠지만, FTA 합의는 여전히 달성할 수 있다. 그럼에도, 한국정부 상층부의 지도력 결여로 양국의 가장 민감한 통상 쟁점 상에 필요한 과감한 결정을 내릴 수 없게 될 가능성에 대비해야 할 필요가 있다. 합의 도출의 실패는 양국 관계에 큰 타격이 될 수 있다; 당면 과제는 “미국의 압력을 뿌리치는 일"이 선거 쟁점으로 와전될 수 없도록 맞대응을 피할 수 있을지이다.

  * 주한미군 쟁점. 전시 작전통제권 이양, 주한미군 재편, (공대지) 사격장 공유 등에 대한 토대를 다지는 등의 동맹 변혁으로 나아가는 동력의 유지 여부가 최상위 현안이다. 10월 한미 연례안보협의회의에서 정확한 전작권 이양 날짜를 결정하지 못했다. 정치적 입김이 샌 전작권 이양 결정은 이제 선거의 해인 2007년 전반기 중에 내려져야만 한다. 정전 관리 책임 이양과 관련된 쟁점 상에 합의 도출 역시 극도로 어려워질 것이다. 그 밖의 곤란한 주한미군 쟁점들은 기지 폐쇄, 훈련 여건, 그리고 용산 기지의 평택 이전 등이 해당한다.
 
2. (기밀) 2007년은 한국 정치사의 격동의 한해가 예상되지만, 한미 양국관계의 부침을 최소화할 필요가 있다. 대사관은 송민순을 필두로 한 새 외교정책팀이 보탬이 될 거로 판정이 날 수 있으며, 아마도 워싱턴 정가 일각의 예상을 뛰어넘을 수도 있다. 송민순은 한국정부 외교정책의 주축 플레이어이며, 지금 그의 경력의 최정점에 도달했다; 그는 노무현의 정치 의제를 그냥 따르기만 하는 게 아니라 오히려 폭넓은 이해관계와 시각을 추구하라고 종용받고 있을 것이다. 우리 쪽에서는 우리가 협상을 통한 북한 핵 문제 해결을 달성하도록 가능한 모든 일을 하고 있으며, 한국의 대북포용 정책에 원칙적으로 반대하지 않는다고 한국민을 안심시킬 필요가 있다. 그러는 가운데 6자 회담에서 한국정부와 의견이 갈리지 않도록 우리는 열과 성의를 다해야 할 것이다. 또한, 우리는 전작권이나 기지 이전과 같은 주한미군 쟁점을 관리할 필요가 있다. 그렇게 해서 국내 정치판에 축구공이 되지 않아야 한다. 이들 정책은 일관되고 투명하게 이행한다면 누가 됐건 차기 한국 대통령과 협력하면서, 한미 동맹을 지키는데 더 낳은 미국의 위치를 확보해 줄 것이다. 요약 끝.
===== 자포자기 정치 =====
3. (기밀) 노무현이 레임덕 대통령 중에서 레임덕 최고봉이라는 점에 이의를 제기하는 사람은 거의 없다. 그는 소속 정당, 법안 의제, 고위직 임명 등에 걸쳐 사실상 통제력이 없다. 최근 여론 조사에서 노무현의 지지율이 5.7%라는 경이롭게 낮은 수치를 보이고 있다. ‘IMF’ 위기가 한 창인 당시 원 달러 환율이 2,000원을 넘어서고, 남한 경제가 급속히 침몰할 당시에도 김영삼의 지지율은 높았다. 최근 노무현이 임기를 못 마치는 첫 대통령이 되지 않길 바란다는 노무현의 내 탓이요 식의 발언은 그의 한량없은 좌절감과 절박한 심정을 잘 표현해 주고 있다.

4. (기밀) 지역주의가 아닌 정책 기반의 새 정치 약속을 많이 한 마당에, 노무현은 그의 소속당이 민주당과 연합하기 위해 그를 버리길 원하고 있어 깊은 실망감에 빠졌다. 민주당은 열린우리당 의원들이 깨고 나온 당이고, 민주당의 지지 기반은 단연 호남지역 지지로부터 나온다. 다음 달 즈음에는 교육 개혁, 부동산 가격, 아마도 내년 예산과 같은 현안과 관련해 야당 한나라당도 여당 우리당도 노무현과 협력하려 들지 않을 것이기에, 노무현에게는 상황이 갈수록 나빠질 것이다.

5. (기밀) 노무현은 자신 이외에 누구도 탓하지 못할 것이다. 시작부터 노무현은 국가보안법 개혁과 교육 개혁 등의 주류를 벗어난 정책이나 구상들을 입안하려고 시도한 바 있다. 노무현의 인선도 문제가 되긴 마찬가지다. 예로 보건복지부 장관에 유시민과 통일부 장관에 이종석은 이념적이고 분열주의적인 인물이다. 그중에서도 최악을 꼽자면 아마도 노무현이 개인 생각을 공개적으로 표출하고픈 욕구로 말미암아 그의 지지층조차 멀어지게 한 일이다. 그 개인적 생각이란 다름 아닌 그의 반미성향, 일본에 대한 증오, 남한 엘리트나 지식 계층에 대한 혐오 그리고 북한에 관한 한 매사에 수정주의자적 경향 등이다.

6. (기밀) 그러나 노무현은 포기를 모르는 사람이며, 대사관은 그가 임기를 마치지 못할 수있다는 최근 사색적 발언을 행동으로 옮길 것으로 예상하지 않는다. 오히려 자신의 정치 인생 전반에 걸쳐 노무현의 전략은 골 깊은 분열을 조장하고, 그 분열을 이용해서 생존하고, 심지어 번성할 수 있었다. 예를 들면, 2004년 노무현은 야당인 한나라당이 촉발한 대통령 탄핵 소추를 이용해서 유권자에게 직접 호소를 하면서, 같은 해 신당 열린우리당이 원내 다수 의석을 확보할 수 있었다. 2004년에 교훈을 얻은 한나라당은 노무현에게 또 다른 기회를 제공할 공산은 크지 않다.

7. (기밀) 또한, 노무현의 전략에는 그에게 유리하도록 민족주의에 기댔다는 점이 있다. 2002년 노무현의 당선의 선봉장은 민족주의 정서였으며, 그의 대통령직 전반에 돋보이는 주제였다. 그 주제는 한국이 동북아의 “균형자”라는 비전에서부터 전작권 환수 요구와 일본의 역사 기록에 대한 공세적인 성토까지 해당된다. 노무현은 해당 이슈가 한국 대중에게 큰 반향을 일으킬 것임을 파악한 상태에서, 임기 마지막 해에 해당 이슈의 일부나 전체를 증폭시킬 공산이 크다.
===== 북한 =====
8. (기밀) 북한 관련 문제도 노무현에게 그러한 정치적인 기회를 제공한다. 노무현에게는 그의 임기 최대 업적인 동시에 최대 실망이 된 부분이 남북관계 발전이다. 그는 자신의 포용 정책에 대해 자부하는데, 그는 포용정책이 북한과의 긴장 완화를 불러왔고, 그중에는 북한 내부에서 중국 스타일의 개혁을 종용한다는 취지의 개성공업지구와 같은 사업 출범도 있었다. 그와 동시에 노무현은 북한의 핵폭탄 개발과 실험이 북한 정책의 실패임을 통절히 인식하고 있다. 노무현은 남은 재임 기간에 (포용정책의) 정당성을 확보하기 위해 사실상 어떤 핵 협정이 되었든 (북한을) 압박하고 나설 것이다. 미 대사관 외교통상부 접선책은 송민순 장관이 외교부 장관으로서 6자 회담을 매일 같이 관리할 것이라고 우리에게 말했다. 베이징 6자 회담이 재계 되어, 어쩔 수 없이 고된 협상이 될 것이기에 노무현은 미국정부와 북한 사이를 오가며 누구에게 비난을 돌려야 할지 고민에 빠지면서 커다란 감정의 기복을 보일 것으로 예상한다.

9. (기밀) 북한 문제는 견해차가 크게 “갈리는” 쟁점이다. 대내적으로, 노무현은 보수주의자들을 무모한 전쟁광으로 묘사하는 가운데 될 수 있으면 광범위한 유권자들에게 호소하는 등 한반도 평화와 안정 유지의 유일한 방안으로 포용정책을 방어할 것이다. 노무현이 전쟁 대 평화 주제에 방점을 찍으려는 목적으로 실제적인 성과에 대한 보장이 없음에도 선거용 승부수의 한 방편으로 김정일과의 정상회담을 모색할 수도 있다. 노무현은 장소와 시간을 불문하고 김정일과 만날 준비가 되어있음을 여러 차례에 걸쳐 밝힌 바 있다. 지금까지 김정일이 정상회담을 수용할 기미가 눈에 띄지는 않지만, 금전적인 혜택은 말할 것도 없고 남한 선거에서의 역동성을 생각할 때 북한 지도자의 생각을 크게 흔들어 놓을 수 있다.

10. (기밀) 한국 내 북한 문제에서 피할 수 없이 미국이 관련될 것이다. 그의 임기가 다해가는 시기에 진전이 없는 6자 회담때문에 노무현의 좌절감은 쌓여갈 듯하며, 노무현은 대북 문제를 미국 강경파의 탓으로 돌리고, 북한 정부에 새로운 강화 제의에 나설 충분한 역량이 있다.
===== 주한미군 쟁점들 =====
11. (기밀) 여론조사를 보면 주한미군의 남한 주둔에 대해 남한 국민의 상당한 다수가 지지하다고 나오고 있는데, 북한의 7월 미사일 발사와 10월 핵 실험의 결과로 미군 주둔에 대한 지지가 증가했다고 믿고 있다. 그러나 주한미군 관련해서 특정 이슈나 예상치 못한 사건이 대선 기간에 악용될 공산도 크다. 아래와 같은 항목 중 일부가 내년에 한국에서 정치 쟁점이 될 수도 있다:
  * 전시 작전통제권의 한국 이양진보세력들은 전작권 이양을 한국 주권의 환수로 묘사할 것이다. 보수세력은 남한의 국가안보를 약화할 거라고 주장할 것이다. 정전 관리 책임을 한국으로 이양하는 관련 쟁점에서도 비슷한 논쟁이 불거질 것이다. 선거의 해 수사적 발언이 있더라도, 한국정부가 전작권 환수에 필요한 단계를 밟도록 우리가 무대 뒤에서 일 할 필요가 있다.

  * 기지나 군사 훈련 문제, 무엇보다도 용산기지이전계획과 연합토지관리계획의 이행 등은 위정자들이 목표로 삼아야 할 일단의 정치적 표적을 제공한다. 그중에 가장 급선무 꼽으라면 한반도 상에 미군 병력의 상당 부분을 재배치하고 통폐합하면서 해당 지역 사회에 미칠 환경적 영향, 부동산 문제, 비용 문제 등이다.

  * 이라크와 아프간 현지 한국군 파병 역시 한국의 대선 캠페인 내내 논란을 살 공산이 있으며, 특히 이라크나 아프간 지역 작전 과정에 안전 상황이 악화할 경우에 그렇다.
12. (기밀) 새 국방장관, 준장 김장수는 양국이 공동으로 이처럼 막중한 정치·군사 부문 2007년 의제를 수행하고, 한미동맹의 변혁을 위한 좋은 동맹이 될 것을 약속하고 있다. 그러나 그는 송민순이나 노무현의 청와대 최측근 참모들이 만끽하고 있는 강력한 정치적 영향력은 확실히 떨어진다. 그렇지만 우리는 한국 국가안보팀 전체가 한미동맹을 당당히 옹호하도록 독려해야 하며, 또한 한미 상호방위조약과 그에 대한 한미 양국의 다짐이 예전과 다름없이 지금도 역내 안보에 중요하다는 사실을 한국 대중에 교육하도록 반드시 독려해야 한다. 더 세부적으로 논하자면 한미동맹이 선거 쟁점이 되는 될 위험 부담을 줄이도록 가능하면 2007년 전반기 안으로 많은 미해결 동맹 쟁점들을 청산하도록 해야겠다.
===== 한미 FTA =====
13. (기밀) 내년에 성공적으로 한미 FTA를 타결한다면 한미 동맹의 또 다른 진일보로 기록될 것이다. 그러나 예상 밖의 결과 역시 준비해야 하는데, 특히 한국정부의 고위 지도부가 한미 FTA를 설파하거나, 단기적 경제 비용을 들이는 일이 장기적 혜택을 놓고 보면 제값을 하는지 그 이유를 설명하는 등의 일을 공식석 상에서 별로 한 게 없다. 실제로, 한미 FTA 찬성자들은 (야당 한나라당이 대부분) 노무현에 대해 매우 비판적이며, 이들 대부분은 노무현 정부의 고위급 수준에서 한미 FTA를 강하게 지지할 마음이 있는지 의구심이 있다. 노무현의 소속당 사람들도 그가 거래를 타결 짓는데 필요한 시장 개방, 변화의 범위를 세밀히 평가했는지 의문시한다. 그러한 의구심은―언론, 국회, 반FTA 로비때문에 켜졌고―지지부진한 FTA 협상 진척에 기여하고 있다. 몬태나 주에서 가진 최근 협상 일정에서 보면 농업과 서비스, 섬유 부문 상에 해묵은 이견은 두말할 것없고, 무역구제조치, 의약품, 자동차 등의 핵심 쟁점에서 또다시 커다란 간극이 드러났다.

14. (기밀) 미 의회의 통상 촉진 권한이 만료되는 2007년 6월 30일 이전에 협정문을 검토할 충분한 시간이 허락되려면 3월 31일까지 한미 FTA가 타결돼야만 한다. 우리는 앞으로 2~3개월 동안에 난제를 해결할 기회가 여전히 있지만, 협상이 시간 내에 타결되지 않을 가능성에 대한 준비도 필요하다. 3월 31일이 가까워 질수록 완수해야 할 작업량이 얼마나 더 있는지 더 잘 평가해야 할 것이다. 만일 큰 공백이 여전히 남아 있다면 미국은 통상 촉진 권한을 연장할 것인지 아니면 추후 기일까지 협상을 보류할 지를 결정해야만 한다. 만일 양측의 합의로 협상에서 발을 빼게 된다면 한미 동맹에 미칠지 모를 정치적인 피해를 최소화하도록 면밀히 조정되어야만 한다.

15. (기밀) 우리는 FTA의 타결이라는 성공은 집권당 정치가들 사이 상당한 분파를 비롯한 한국 내 강력한 반대를 참작할 때 그 자체로 일단의 도전 과제를 양산할 것임을 덧붙인다. 우리는 미국이 도맡아 FTA를 설파하는 게 아니라 한국정부를 압박해서 자국의 지역구 구민에게 한미 FTA를 강매하도록 할 필요가 있다. FTA 협정문에 대한 국민적 추인이 결하면, 미국이 한미 FTA때문에 더욱 이득을 얻게 될 것이고, 우리가 FTA를 한국민의 목구멍에 억지로 쳐넣었다는 인상을 주게 될 것이다.
===== 새 외교정책팀 ===== 
16. (기밀) 송민순은 청와대에서 외교통상부로 이동했으며 자신의 권한과 영향력도 상당히 강화되었다. 그는 새 통일외교안보정책 실장인 백종천에게 그림자를 드리울 것이다. 백종천은 퇴임한 군 관계자로 세종연구소 출신인데 매일같이 외교 정책을 입안하고 구현하는 감독자 역할이라기보다는 권진호 국가안보보자관 모형과 같은 참모가 될 듯하다. 백 실장의 직무 대행 윤병세는 송민순과 가까운 외교통상부 직업외교관이다. 송 장관은 외교통상부 직원들을 대상으로 한 취임사에서 그의 일순위 우선 과제는 북한의 비핵화이며, 그 뒤를 이어 한미 동맹을 강화하는 것임을 분명히 밝힌 바 있다.

17. (기밀) 송민순은 실무 중심의 외교통상부 장관이 될 것이다. 그는 6자 회담을 관리 운용하길 원한다고 소속 직원들에게 이미 말한 바 있다. 그의 첫 해외방문은 하룻밤 일정의 도쿄방문이며, 뒤이어 워싱턴 방문은 좀더 긴 일정 예정되어 있는데, 현재로서는 1월 초 가능성이 높다. 그 두 수도에서, 그는 향후 메시지를 수령하게 것이다. 도교 방문은 송 장관의 수행직원에 의하면 상징적 방문으로 간주하는 이유는 그가 일본 외교관들과의 관계가 썩 좋지 않았기 때문이다. 송 장관은 6자 회담에서 일본의 입장에 대해 특히 비평적인데, 일본을 북한과의 합의 도출에 장애물로 간주하고 있다. 그의 워싱턴 방문에서는 청와대에서 마지막 임기 중에 그의 대미 비판 발언의 일부를 정정하려고 각별한 노력을 할 것이다.

18. (기밀) 전투적이고 거침없는 발언을 하는 송민순은 반기문이나 전 유명환 차관 등의 일부 동료들과는 다르게 미국의 견해를 본능적으로 포용하지는 않는다. 그러나 그는 미합중국을 잘 이해하고 있으며, 한미 동맹의 중요성에 대해 예리한 진단을 하고 있다. 우리 외교통상부 접선책은 그가 청와대에서 근무할 당시보다는 지금이 훨씬 더 전통적인 대미 외교 명분의 수호자가 될 것으로 예상하고 있다. 주한미군 방위비 분담금 비용협상의 조기 마무리, 레바논에 한국 평화유지군 파병 제안, 한국군 이라크 파병 연장 제안 등의 최근 몇 가지 추이가 모두 송 장관이 감독하에 이루어졌는데, 이는 워싱턴 정가에서의 한국의 위신과 자신의 대외 이미지 개선을 제고할 목적도 있다.
===== 한미동맹 지키기 =====
19. (기밀) 우리의 가장 근본적인 목적은 한반도와 역내 평화를 지켜온 한미 동맹을 보호하는 일이다. 한미동맹은 단지 안보나 경제적 이득의 문제만은 아니다. 민주주의, 인권, 개방 사회, 공개 시장 등의 가치를 공유하는 문제이다. 세계 속에서 역사적인 반목과 긴장 상태로 전 세계에 알려진 불안정한 지역에서 미국이 주둔한다는 문제의식도 있다. 미국은 중국의 부상을 관리하고, 일본과 주변 이웃국가 사이에 긴장을 제거하도록 한국에 주둔할 필요가 있다. 현 지도부에 대한 우리의 좌절감이 무엇이든 간에 한국과의 강력한 동맹 관계는 분명히 우리의 이해관계에 부합한다.

20. (기밀) 한미동맹이 내년의 국내 정치 상황으로부터 상처받지 않고 남으려면, 우리는 여러 전선에서 일관되고 예측 가능한 정책 구현이 필요하다.
  * 한미동맹 그 자체에 관련해서, 우리는 동맹의 진화과정에서 한국을 진정한 동반자로 만들어 가는 로드맵을 고수해서 동맹 변혁을 이어갈 필요가 있다: 전시작전권 이양 날짜의 합의; 이전할 기지 선정 등이다.

  * 북한과 관련해서, 미국이 협상을 통한 북핵 문제를 해결한다는 다짐은 변함이 없으며, 그러한 다짐이 6자 회담을 통해서 이뤄질 것이라고 한국 사람들을 안심시킬 필요가 있다. 대북 포용 정책이 6자 회담에서 남한의 재량권을 극대화하고, 장기적으로는 실제적인 북한 개혁을 도모하기 위해 면밀히 교정되는 한 미국이 한국의 포용 정책에 반대한다는 남한 국민들 사이 오해에 대해서도 적극적으로 싸워야만 한다.

  * FTA 관련해서, 우리는 인내심을 갖고 계속 협상하고, 무역구제조치에서 한국민을 달랠 만한 절차적 움직임의 가용 여부를 파악해야 한다. 그러나 목표에 도달하지 못하게 될 수 있음을 또한 인지하고, 합의가 없을 때는 원만한 협상 종결에도 총력을 기울여야 할 것이다.

  * 마지막으로 한국의 비자면제프로그램 회원국 가입과 관련해서, 미국은 한국민의 미합중국 방문을 환영한다는 강력한 메시지를 보내기 위한 자체 로드맵 상에 확연한 진척을 이뤄야 할 필요가 있다. 대사관은 이러한 조처를 통해 일관되고, 예측 가능한 조치를 단행한다면, 미합중국이 남한과 함께 강력한 동맹관계를 보전할 것이고, 2008년과 그 이후까지 노무현의 후임자와 함께 일하는 데 유리한 고지를 점하게 될 것임을 확신하는 바이다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/5/06seoul4260|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 바깥 고리 =====
  - [[http://news.hankooki.com/lpage/politics/200611/h2006112818100421080.htm|노대통령 "임기 못마치는 첫 대통령 되지 않길 바라"]]  //한국일보//
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL4260.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 004260 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO PASS USTR AND COMMERCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/14/2016 
TAGS: KS [Korea (South)], PREL [External Political Relations] 
SUBJECT: U.S.-ROK ALLIANCE MANAGEMENT - LOOKING AHEAD TO 
2007 
 
Classified By: AMB Alexander Vershbow.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) With only 12 months left until the next presidential 
election, President Roh finds himself stuck in the lowest 
approval ratings ever for a Korean president -- 5.7 percent 
according to the most recent poll, low teens according to 
others.  Roh's desperation to recover and have some say in 
the choice of his successor will color virtually all aspects 
of ROK political life in the coming year.  Inevitably, 
U.S.-ROK relations will be involved.  Our actions and words 
will be scrutinized and criticized, and there will be much 
more than the usual quota of exaggeration and fabrication by 
the Korean press and politicians.  The following issues come 
in "fragile: handle with care" packaging: 
 
-- PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.  The USG must vigorously and 
continuously battle the South Korean conventional wisdom that 
the U.S. favors a GNP candidate; the top priority is to avoid 
the U.S. becoming an election issue as in 2002, when Roh 
Moo-hyun's campaign exploited the death of two schools girls 
hit accidentally by a USFK vehicle. 
 
-- NORTH KOREA.  President Roh continues to believe that his 
best chance of leaving a legacy -- and, at the same time, of 
regaining some popular support -- is through a "home run" on 
North Korean issues.  Since a breakthrough in the Six Party 
Talks is unlikely, at least in the short term, Roh may seek 
to arrange a North-South summit to demonstrate that 
engagement with Pyongyang is still working, despite the 
likely dearth of any concrete results.  Our challenge is to 
pursue denuclearization of North Korea divorced from South 
Korean domestic political developments, and to keep the ROK 
from breaking ranks in the Six Party Talks. 
 
-- THE KORUS-FTA.  The latest round of discussions in Montana 
was a disappointment, although an FTA deal is still 
achievable.  Nevertheless, we need to prepare for the 
possibility that, lacking leadership from the top, the ROKG 
team will be unable to make the tough decisions required on 
our most sensitive issues.  A failure to come to an agreement 
could take a toll on our bilateral relations; the challenge 
would be to avoid recriminations that could make "resisting 
U.S. pressure" a campaign issue. 
 
-- USFK ISSUES.  The overarching issue is to maintain 
momentum toward alliance transformation, preparing the ground 
for transfer of wartime operational control (OPCON), USFK 
realignment, and range sharing.  The Defense Ministers' 
meeting (SCM) in October did not decide on the exact date of 
OPCON transfer.  This politically charged decision must now 
be made during the first half of election year 2007. 
Reaching agreement on the related issue of the transfer of 
Armistice maintenance responsibilities will also be extremely 
difficult.  Other thorny USFK issues include base closures, 
training needs, and the move from Yongsan Garrison to 
Pyeongtaek. 
 
¶2.  (C) While 2007 will be a turbulent year for Korean 
politics, we need to minimize the ups and downs in our 
bilateral relationship.  We believe the new foreign policy 
team led by Song Min-soon could prove to be helpful, probably 
more so than some may expect in Washington.  Song, the 
dominant foreign policy player within the ROKG, now has 
reached the pinnacle of his chosen career; he must be prodded 
to pursue broader interests and perspectives rather than just 
following Roh's political agenda.  For our part, we need to 
assure the Koreans that we are doing everything possible to 
achieve a negotiated solution to the North Korean nuclear 
issue and that we are not opposed in principle to the ROK's 
policy of engagement with the DPRK, while doing our best to 
keep Seoul on the same page in the Six Party Talks.  We also 
need to manage USFK issues, such as OPCON and base 
relocation, so that they do not become domestic political 
 
SEOUL 00004260  002 OF 005 
 
 
footballs.  These policies, implemented consistently and 
transparently, will place the USG in a better position to 
protect the Alliance and work with the next ROK president, 
whoever that might be.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------- 
DESPERATION POLITICS 
------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Few in South Korea would dispute that Roh is the 
lamest of lame duck presidents.  He has virtually no control 
over his party, the legislative agenda, or high-level 
appointments.  A recent poll show Roh's approval rating at an 
amazingly low 5.7 percent.  Even at the height of the "IMF" 
crisis, when the South Korean economy was rapidly sinking 
with the won-dollar exchange rate at over 2000, Kim Young-sam 
had a higher approval rating.  Roh's recent woe-is-me 
comments about possibly being the first Korean president not 
to finish his term illustrate his profound frustration and 
desperation. 
 
¶4.  (C) After having promised so much -- new politics based 
on ideas, not regionalism -- Roh is deeply disappointed that 
his own political party wants to abandon him to form an 
alliance with the Democratic Party, a regional party from 
which Uri members broke away and whose support is exclusively 
from the eastern region of the country.  Over the next month 
or so, things will get worse for Roh as neither the 
opposition GNP nor the ruling Uri will cooperate with him on 
issues such as education reform, real estate prices, and 
possibly the budget for next year. 
 
¶5. (C) Roh has nobody but himself to blame.  From the 
beginning, Roh has attempted to put in place policies and 
ideas out of the mainstream, including the reform of the 
national security law and education reform.  Equally 
troubling were his appointments, such as Rhyu Shi-Min at the 
Ministry of Health and Lee Jong-seok at the Ministry of 
Unification, who were ideological and divisive.  Perhaps 
worst of all, Roh's penchant for publicly verbalizing his 
private thoughts -- his anti-American tendencies, hatred of 
the Japanese, loathing for the South Korean elite and 
educated class, and revisionist tendencies in all things 
North Korean -- have alienated even many of his supporters. 
 
¶6.  (C) Still, Roh is not a quitter and we don't expect him 
to act on his recent musings about not finishing his term. 
Rather, throughout his political life, Roh's strategy has 
been to create deep divisions, which he then takes advantage 
of, allowing him to survive and even prosper.  For example, 
in 2004, Roh used the impeachment triggered by the opposition 
GNP to appeal directly to voters, allowing his newly formed 
Uri Party to gain a majority of the seats in the National 
Assembly elections that year.  The GNP, having learned its 
lesson in 2004, is not likely to give Roh another such 
opportunity. 
 
¶7.  (C) Roh's strategy has also been to tap nationalism to 
his advantage.  Nationalist sentiment played a key role in 
Roh's election in 2002, and has been a prominent theme 
throughout his presidency, from his vision of Korea as a 
regional "balancer," to his calls for Korea's resumption of 
OPCON, to his aggressive denunciations of Japan's historical 
record.  Knowing that these issues resonate deeply with the 
Korean public, it is likely that Roh will amplify some or all 
of these issues in his final year in office. 
 
----------- 
NORTH KOREA 
----------- 
 
¶8. (C) Issues related to North Korea present such political 
opportunities for Roh.  For Roh, the developments in 
North-South relations during his tenure rank among his 
greatest achievements and biggest disappointments.  He is 
proud of his engagement policy, which he believes has brought 
about a reduction in tensions with North Korea, and of the 
 
SEOUL 00004260  003 OF 005 
 
 
launch of projects like the Kaesong Industrial Complex that 
are supposed to encourage Chinese-style reforms in the DPRK. 
At the same time, Roh is acutely aware that the DPRK's 
development and testing of nuclear devices represent a 
failure of his North Korea policy.  Over his remaining time 
in the office, Roh will press for virtually any nuclear deal 
to achieve vindication.  Our MOFAT contacts have told us that 
Song Min-soon, as foreign minister, will be the day-to-day 
manager of the Six Party Talks.  As the talks resume in 
Beijing and inevitably become laborious, we can expect Roh to 
show increasing mood swings as he vacillates between 
Pyongyang and Washington in dishing out the blame. 
 
¶9.  (C) North Korea is very much a "wedge" issue. 
Domestically, Roh will defend engagement as the only way to 
maintain peace and stability on the Peninsula, appealing to 
the broadest possible electorate while trying to portray 
conservatives as reckless warmongers.  To highlight the 
peace-vs.-war theme, Roh may seek a summit meeting with Kim 
Jong-il as a kind of electoral wild card, even if there is no 
assurance of a substantive outcome.  Roh has said on many 
occasions that he is prepared to meet with KJI anywhere, 
anytime.  So far, KJI has shown no indications of obliging, 
but the electoral dynamics in the South -- not to mention 
monetary benefits -- could sway the North Korean leader. 
 
¶10.  (C) North Korea issues in the ROK will inevitably 
involve the U.S.  As his time in office runs out -- and as 
his frustrations at the lack of progress in the Six Party 
Talks likely mount -- Roh is fully capable of blaming U.S. 
hardliners for the problem and making new overtures to 
Pyongyang. 
 
----------- 
USFK ISSUES 
----------- 
 
¶11. (C) Polls consistently show that a sizable majority of 
the Korean public supports the presence of U.S. troops in 
South Korea, and we believe that support has increased as a 
result of the DPRK July missile launches and October nuclear 
test.  Still, specific issues and unexpected events involving 
USFK are likely to be exploited during the election campaign. 
 Some of the following items could become domestic political 
issues next year: 
 
-- The transfer of wartime operational control (OPCON) to the 
ROK.  Progressives will cast it as the return of Korean 
sovereignty.  Conservatives will argue it weakens South 
Korea's national security.  Similar arguments will surround 
the related issue of the transfer of Armistice maintenance 
responsibilities to the ROK.  Despite election-year rhetoric, 
we need to work behind the scenes to ensure that the ROKG is 
taking the steps necessary prepare for assuming OPCON. 
 
-- Basing and training issues, most notably implementation of 
the Yongsan Relocation Plan (YRP) and Land Partnership Plan 
(LPP) provide a host of political targets at which 
politicians will take aim.  Topping the list are cost 
concerns, real estate issues and the environmental impact on 
local communities posed by the consolidation and relocation 
of a significant portion of the U.S. Forces on the Peninsula. 
 
-- The ROK troop deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan will 
also likely remain controversial throughout the ROK 
presidential campaign, particularly if the security situation 
in either area of operation worsens. 
 
¶12.  (C) The new Defense Minister, General Kim Jang-soo, 
promises to be a good ally in our combined effort to 
implement this very heavy POL-MIL agenda in 2007 and to 
transform the alliance, but he clearly lacks the strong 
political influence enjoyed by Song Min-soon and other Blue 
House confidants of President Roh.  We must nonetheless 
encourage the entire ROK national security team to stand up 
for the U.S.-ROK alliance and to educate the Korean populace 
about the fact that the Mutual Defense Treaty, and our joint 
 
SEOUL 00004260  004 OF 005 
 
 
commitment to it, are as important now to the security of the 
region as they ever were.  More specifically, we should try 
to clear the decks of as many unresolved alliance issues as 
possible in the first half of 2007, to reduce the risk that 
alliance problems could become campaign issues. 
 
--- 
FTA 
--- 
 
¶13. (C) The successful conclusion of the KORUS-FTA next year 
would mark another major step forward in the alliance, but we 
must also be prepared for a different outcome, particularly 
since ROKG senior leaders have done little publicly to make 
the case for the FTA, or to explain why the short-term 
economic costs are worth the long-term benefits.  Indeed, 
supporters of the FTA (most of them in the opposition GNP 
party) are highly critical of Roh, many of them doubting 
there was ever strong support for the FTA at the highest 
levels of his government.  Others in Roh's own party question 
whether he carefully assessed the extent of the changes and 
market openings needed to conclude a deal.  Such doubts -- 
magnified by the media, National Assembly, and anti-FTA 
lobbies -- have contributed to the lack of progress in the 
negotiations.  The most recent round in Montana again 
revealed a big gap on key issues, including trade remedies, 
pharmaceuticals and autos, not to mention long-standing 
differences on agriculture, services and textiles. 
 
¶14.  (C)  The KORUS-FTA has to be concluded by March 31 to 
allow Congress enough time to review it before Trade 
Promotion Authority expires on June 30, 2007.  While there is 
still a chance we can resolve the tough issues in the next 
2-3 months, we need to prepare for the possibility that 
negotiations might not conclude in time.  As March 31 draws 
nearer, we will be better able to assess how much more work 
remains to be done.  If the gap still remains large, we will 
have to decide whether to seek an extension of Trade 
Promotion Authority or just shelve the work until a later 
date.   Walking away from the talks, if agreed upon by both 
sides, must be carefully justified to minimize the political 
damage to the alliance that many will read into it. 
 
¶15.  (C)  We would add that success in achieving an FTA will 
bring its own set of challenges, given the strong political 
opposition here -- including a significant fraction of ruling 
party politicians.  We will need to press the ROKG to be more 
forceful in selling the FTA to its own constituents, rather 
than leaving it to us to make the case.  Absent their 
advocacy for the agreement, the impression will be that the 
U.S. gains more from the FTA and that we shoved it down the 
Koreans' throats. 
 
----------------------- 
NEW FOREIGN POLICY TEAM 
----------------------- 
 
¶16. (C) Song Min-soon has moved from the Blue House to MOFAT 
with his authority and influence substantially enhanced.  He 
clearly overshadows the new national security advisor, Baek 
Jong-chun, a little known academic (and retired military 
officer) from Sejong Institute, who will likely be an advisor 
in the Kwon Chin-ho mold rather than someone who oversees 
day-to-day foreign policy-making and implementation.  Baek's 
deputy is Yun Byung-se, a career MOFAT officer close to Song. 
 In his inaugural remarks to MOFAT staff, Song made it clear 
that his number-one priority was to denuclearize North Korea, 
followed by strengthening the U.S.-ROK alliance. 
 
17  (C) Song will be a hands-on foreign minister.  He has 
already told his staff that he wants to run the Six Party 
Talks.  His first trip abroad will be a short overnight stay 
in Tokyo followed by a longer visit to Washington, now likely 
in early January.  In both capitals, he will have forthcoming 
messages.  The Tokyo stop is considered symbolic by Song's 
staff, because he has had notably poor relations with 
Japanese diplomats.  Song has been particularly critical of 
 
SEOUL 00004260  005 OF 005 
 
 
Japanese positions in the Six Party Talks, regarding them as 
obstacles to reaching a deal with North Korea.  In 
Washington, Song will make a big effort to correct some of 
his remarks critical of the U.S. during his last days in the 
Blue House. 
 
¶18.  (C) Combative and outspoken, Song does not instinctively 
embrace U.S. views as do some of his colleagues, like Ban 
Ki-moon or Former Vice Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan. 
Still, he has a good understanding of the United States and 
an acute appreciation of the importance of the alliance.  Our 
MOFAT contacts expect him now to champion these traditional 
foreign affairs causes a lot more than he did when he was in 
the Blue House.  We understand that several recent 
developments, including the early wrap-up of the negotiations 
on USFK's burden-sharing costs, the proposal to deploy ROK 
peacekeeping troops to Lebanon, and the proposal to extend 
ROK troops in Iraq were all overseen by Song with an eye 
toward improving the ROK's standing -- and his own image -- 
in Washington. 
 
----------------------- 
PROTECTING THE ALLIANCE 
----------------------- 
 
¶19.  (C) Our most fundamental objective is to protect the 
U.S.-ROK alliance, which has kept peace on the Peninsula and 
the region.  The alliance is not just about security or even 
economic benefits.  It is about shared values -- democracy, 
human rights, open society and open markets.  It is also 
about having a U.S. presence in this volatile part of the 
world known for historical enmity and tensions.  We need to 
be in Korea to help manage the rise of China and defuse 
tensions between Japan and its neighbors.  A strong alliance 
relationship with the ROK is certainly in our interest, 
whatever our frustrations with its current leadership. 
 
¶20.  (C) To ensure that the alliance emerges unscathed from 
domestic political developments next year, we need consistent 
and predictable policy implementation on a number of fronts. 
 
--On the alliance itself, we need to continue the 
transformation by sticking to the roadmap of making South 
Korea a true partner in alliance evolution: the transfer date 
for OPCON needs to be settled; bases have to move. 
 
--On North Korea, we need to reassure the Koreans that we are 
committed to a negotiated settlement of the North Korean 
nuclear issue and that this will be done through the Six 
Party process.  We also must combat the strong misperception 
among South Koreans that we are opposed to the ROK's 
engagement policy, as long as it is calibrated to maximize 
leverage in the Six Party Talks and, in the longer term, to 
promote real reform in the North. 
 
--On FTA, we should continue to negotiate patiently and see 
if there is a procedural move that could placate the Koreans 
on trade remedies, but also realize that we may not get there 
at all and strive for an amicable conclusion of negotiations, 
in the event there is no agreement. 
 
--Finally, on Korea's entry into the Visa-Waiver Program, we 
need to make visible progress on our roadmap to send a 
powerful message to the Korean people that we welcome Koreans 
in the United States. 
 
We are confident that through these steps, taken consistently 
and predictably, the United States will preserve a strong 
alliance relationship with South Korea and be well placed to 
work with Roh Moo-hyun's successor in 2008 and beyond. 
VERSHBOW
</file>