^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL4040  |  2006-11-22 08:06  |   기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PARM PREL MNUC KNNP KN KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 미 대사, 퇴임하는 윤광웅 국방장관 고별 방문 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 004040 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))
국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 11/21/2016 
태그: PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), MNUC(([Military Nuclear Applications])), KNNP(([Nuclear Non-Proliferation])), KN(([Korea (North)])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 미 대사, 퇴임하는 윤광웅 국방장관 고별 방문
참조: SEOUL 03768 
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사.  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/18 20:40//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점: 11월 22일 대사는 퇴임하는 윤광웅 국방장관의 사무실을 방문한 가운데:
버시바우 대사는 윤광웅의 지도력과 남한의 글로벌 역할 강화, 그리고 한미동맹과 동맹 변환에 대한 지원에 대해 그에게 감사하였다.
  * 윤광웅은 한국군 이라크 파병 연장의 중요성을 인정하였으나, 국회에서 전투 기운이 서리고 있다고 우려를 표명하였다.

  * 그는 한국 정부는 중국의 공헌을 넘지 않는 대등하게 계산된 450명 인원 부대의 레바논 파견을 권고할 예정이라고 버시바우 대사에게 소식을 알렸다.

  * 윤광웅은 자신의 후임인 김장수는 안보 정책 사안에 정통하다고 설명하였다.

  * 그는 전작권 이양의 정확한 날짜의 지정이 중요하다는 데 동의하지만, 이 사안에 좀 더 “관대함”을 보여주길 미국 정부에 촉구하였다.

  * 윤광웅은 자신이 14개 기지 반환에 서명했다고 공개했지만, 환경부 장관은 나머지 기지에 대해 주한 미군의 추가적인 정보를 모색하고 있다고 주의를 당부하였다.

  * 버시바우 대사는 직도 사격 훈련장 건설을 위한 윤광웅의 그간 노고에 감사하였다. 그러나 대사는 기상 여건으로 말미암아 2007년 2월까지는 완성 기일이 미뤄질 듯하다는 소식을 들었다고 했다.

  * 두 사람은 때가 되면 한국 정부가 확신을 하고 대량살상무기 확산방지구상 전면 참여하게 될 거라는 견해를 같이하였다.

  * 두 사람은 6자 회담의 앞길이 매우 어려울 거라고 견해를 같이하였다. 윤광웅은 북한이 평화로 가는 진정한 진전에 반대할 듯하다고 예견하면서, 그 이유로 김정일이 정권을 정당화하기 위해 미합중국을 적국 이미지로 유지할 필요가 있기 때문이라고 했다. 

  * 버시바우 대사가 윤 장관을 고별 방문한 마지막 외국 고위 관리이며, 유일한 외국 대사라고 하였다. 윤광웅은 11월 24일 11시(서울 시간) 이·취임식 행사에서 김장수 장군으로 교체될 예정이다. 요점 끝. 요약 끝.

2. (기밀) 11월 22일 버시바우 대사는 퇴임하는 한국 국방장관 윤광웅의 사무실을 방문하였다. 버시바우 대사는 특별히 이라크와 아프간에서 남한의 글로벌 역할을 강화해준 공로와 한미동맹에 대한 지원, 그리고 윤 장관의 감독하에 자리를 잡은 의미 있는 한미 군사 변혁 등에 기여한 윤광웅의 지도력에 감사하였다. 버시바우 대사는 이라크와 아프간, 그리고 아마도 예고된 레바논까지 대한민국의 군병력 지원은 언론에 자주 그려진 비관론을 반박하는 역할을 했다고 평가하였다. 윤광웅은 한미동맹의 역사에서 그의 말로는 “복잡다단한 시기” 중에 그간 대사의 노고를 감사한다고 말하였다.

===== 이라크 파병 연장 =====

3. (기밀) 이라크와 관련 대사는 에르빌 자이툰 부대의 활약이 미군 지휘관들의 모델로 조명되고 있다고 지적하였다. 그는 이라크 북부 재건 지원에 한국군이 펼치고 있는 우수한 활약이 여전히 필요하므로 한국군이 너무 일찍 철수하지 않기를 희망한다고 말하였다. 윤광웅은 노 대통령이 어려운 시기에 당면했으며, 국회 승인을 받아 파병 법안을 연장하기 위해선 상당한 노력을 기울여야 할 거라고 대답하였다. 그는 노무현 대통령과 부시 대통령이 11월 18일 하노이 회동에서 그 문제를 논의하기 전까지 언론에 파병 연장의 전망에 대해 일절 언급하지 않기 위해 국방부가 고충이 심했다고 버시바우 대사에게 말하였다. “마지막 결정은 전적으로 우리 대통령의 몫이다”고 윤광웅은 말하였다.

===== 레바논 임시주둔유엔군 =====

4. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 레바논에 부대를 파견하기로 한 한국의 예고된 결정은 세계 속에서 커지고 있는 한국의 적극적인 역할을 보여주는 또 하나의 사례라고 언급하였다. 윤광웅은 한국이 레바논에 450명 인원의 부대를 파견하라고 국회에 권고하는 부처 간 조율된 합의를 최근에 끌어냈다고 대사에게 알렸다. 파견 인원수를 그보다 더 늘릴 수 없는 이유는 그 숫자가 현재 중국이 지원하는 병력이 대충 그 정도 되기 때문이라고 말하였다. 한국이 중국보다 더 많이 파견한다면 곤란할 거라고 윤광웅은 설명하였다.

===== 신임 국방장관 =====

5. (기밀) 윤 장관은 후임 김장수는 (참조 전문에 인적 사항) 안보 정책 사안에 상당히 친숙하다고 설명하였다. 개개인은 그가 맡은 부처의 책무에 대한 다른 접근 방식을 도입한다는 사실을 존중하는 게 중요하다고 윤광웅은 알듯 모를 듯하게 말하였다. 그는 버시바우 대사가 그간 보여준 같은 수준의 프로다운 예의를 김 내정자에게도 보여 줄 것을 대사에게 충고하였다. 버시바우 대사는 벨 주한미군 사령관이 김장수 장군을 높게 평가했다고 했다. 버시바우 대사는 김장수와 함께 건설적인 동반자 관계를 고대한다고 말하였다.

===== 전작권 이양 =====

6. (기밀) 대사는 마무리해야 할 중요한 일이 남아 있다고 지적하면서, 양국 정부가 2007년에 전시 작전권 이양 절차에 들어가도록 10월 한미 안보협의회의에서 합의된 범위 내에서 날짜를 지정할 필요성을 강조하였다. 윤광웅은 구체적인 시간표가 반드시 2007년 상반기 중에 정해져야 된다는 데 동의하였다. 윤 장관은 해당 쟁점에 대한 한국 합참 본부와 주한 미군 사이에 이견이 있을 거라고 예견하였지만, 50년이 넘게 좋은 동맹 관계는 합의를 도출하도록 “양국을 잘 도와줄 것”이라고 표명하였다. “더 강한 동맹국이(미국 정부) 더 관대함을 보여주면 상당히 도움이 될 것이다”고 윤광웅은 충고하였다.

===== 기지 반환 =====

7. (기밀) 만일 기지 반환 문제가 계속 시일을 끌게 되면, 그 문제가 2007년 한국 대선과 엮길 수도 있다는 대사의 경고에 대한 응대로 윤광웅은 전날에 그가 그간 14개 기지 반환에 서명했음을 알려주었다. 윤광웅은 “막중한 책임감”과 더불어 한미동맹을 위해 가능한 한 조속히 문제를 해결하는 게 상책이라는 철학으로 그렇게 한 거라고 말하였다. 윤광웅은 환경부 장관이 남은 기지 반환과 관련 주한 미군의 추가적인 정보를 모색할 거라고 주의를 당부하였다. 윤광웅은 이런 지연 사태에 대해 미합중국이 그간 해 한국을 위해 해놓은 모든 일을 이해하지 못하는 젊은 세대에게 지연의 책임을 돌렸다. 버시바우 대사는 넓게 보면 한국민 전반에 환경 문제에 대한 미국 입장의 기초를 제공하는 한미 주둔군 지위 협정에 대한 이해가 충분하지 않다고 응수하였다. 그는 주한 미군이 사실상 한미 주둔군 지위 협정의 요건보다 많은 일을 했다고 지적하였다.

===== 직도 사격 훈련장 =====

8. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 직도 공대지 사격장의 자동채점장비 설치를 완성하도록 노력해준 윤 장관의 노고에 감사하였다. 윤광웅은 기상 여건으로 건설이 늦춰지고 있음을 한탄하면서, 전날 직도 사업이 "현실적으로" 2007년 2월 전까지는 완성되지 않을 거라는 보고 받았다고 말하였다. 그는 전날 마지막 국무회의에 참석한 자리에서 용산기지가 재배치 되는 평택과 직도 지역 당국자를 모두를 한자리에 모이도록 값진 지원을 아끼지 않은 한명숙 총리에게 감사드렸다고 윤광웅 장관은 말하였다.

===== 대량살상무기 확산방지구상 =====

9. (기밀) 대사는 국방부가 여타 다른 정부 부처보다 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(이하 PSI)에서 한국의 역할에 대해 더 긍정적인 의견을 갖고 있음을 적시하면서 PSI 전면 참여 주장을 계속 펼쳐 주기를 촉구하였다. 이 사안을 두고 정치적인 논쟁은 지나치게 감정적이라고 대사는 평하면서, 만일 한국 당국자들이 사실관계에 집중한다면, 지금 이미 하기로 다짐한 내용의 지원만 하더라도 PSI가 추인되었겠다고 파악했을 거라고 덧붙였다. 두 사람은 때가 되면 한국 정부가 그 점에 관해 아마 확신하게 될 거라고 견해를 같이하였다.

===== 북한 핵실험 =====

10. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 북한 핵실험에 대한 국방부가 강력한 목소리에 대해 비슷하게 칭송하였다. 그는 6자 회담이 곧 재개될 듯하나 북한이 핵무기를 자발적으로 포기할지 확실치 않다고 지적하였다. 그러므로 대사는 한미 간의 공동 대응이 매우 중요하다고 촉구하면서, 부시 대통령과 노무현 대통령이 양국의 접근 방식을 한데 모을 수 있게 에이펙 정상회담에서 회동할 수 있게 되어 대사는 기쁘다고 덧붙였다. 윤광웅은 앞으로 갈 길이 매우 험난할 거라고 설명하면서, 김정일이 그의 군부 중심의 독재 체제를 지속하려는 주요 명분으로 미합중국에 대한 북한 주민의 두려움을 이용하기 때문에 북한이 실상은 평화 체제를 반대할 것이라는 그의 말을 빌리자면 “간단한 생각”을 내놓았다.

11. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 6자 회담 협상이 힘겨운 여정이 될 거라는데 견해를 같이하였다. 그는 북한의 조속하고 구체적인 비핵화 조치를 추구하는 가운데, 북한은 될 수 있는 한 그러한 조치에 나서는 걸 뒤로 미루길 원할 거라고 지적하였다. 윤광웅은 그러나 길게 봐서 평화가 가능하다는 믿음을 피력하며, 시간이 가면 김정일의 권력 장악이 약해지는 건 자연스러운 과정이기 때문이라고 했다.

===== 휴식할 시간 =====

12. (기밀) 윤광웅 장관은 미 대사가 그가 국방장관으로서 회동하는 마지막 외국 고위 관리가 될 듯하다고 언급하면서 마무리했다. (주석: 그의 부하 직원들은 미 대사가 윤 장관에게 고별 방문을 청한 유일한 외국 대사라고 우리에게 알려 주었다. 주석 끝.)윤광웅은 버시바우 대사가 남한 내부와 북한 내부를 망라해 특별히 격동기에 서울로 부임했다고 언급하였다. “당신은 많은 일을 해야만 했는데, 당신 건강에 영향을 주지 않았길 바란다”고 윤광웅은 말하였다. 버시바우 대사는 작년의 여러 일은 매우 흥미로운 시간이 되었다며 대답하였다. 그러나 중요한 추세는 현재 긍정적인 방향으로 나아가고 있고, 미합중국과 남한 국민 사이에 유대감이 쌓이고 있는 듯 보인다는 점이라고 그는 생각하였다. 버시바우 대사는 김장수에게 책무를 넘겨준 이후에 첫 번째로 할 일이 무엇인지 윤광웅에게 물었다. “내 아내와 나는 시골에 내려가서 휴식을 취할 예정이다”고 윤광웅은 활짝 웃으면서 대답하였다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul4040|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL4040.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 004040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/21/2016 
TAGS: PARM PREL MNUC KNNP KN KS
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S FARWELL CALL ON OUTGOING ROK DEFENSE 
MINISTER YOON 
 
REF: SEOUL 03768 
 
Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  During the Ambassador's November 22 office 
call on outgoing ROK Defense Minister Yoon, Kwang-ung: 
 
-- The Ambassador thanked Yoon for his leadership, 
enhancement of South Korea's global role, and support for the 
alliance and its transformation. 
 
-- Yoon acknowledged the importance of renewing the ROK troop 
dispatch to Iraq, but expressed concern a battle is looming 
in the National Assembly. 
 
-- He also informed the Ambassador the ROKG will recommend 
dispatching 450 troops to Lebanon (a number calculated to be 
on par with, but not exceed, China's contribution). 
 
-- Yoon described his successor, Kim, Jang-soo, as 
well-versed in security policy issues. 
 
-- He agreed on the importance of designating a specific date 
for the transfer of wartime OPCON, but urged the USG to show 
more "leniency" on the issue. 
 
-- Yoon announced he had signed off on 14 camp returns, but 
cautioned that the Ministry of Environment sought further 
information from USFK on the remaining camps. 
 
-- The Ambassador thanked Yoon for his efforts to construct a 
training range on Jikdo, but learned weather conditions would 
likely delay completion until February 2007. 
 
-- Both agreed that, in time, the ROKG could be convinced to 
fully endorse PSI. 
 
-- They agreed the road ahead on Six-Party Talks would be 
extremely difficult. Yoon predicted the DPRK would likely 
oppose real progress toward peace because Kim Jong-il needed 
to maintain the image of the United States as the enemy in 
order to justify his regime. 
 
The Ambassador was the last foreign dignitary, and only 
foreign ambassador, to pay a farewell call on Minister Yoon, 
who will be replaced by General Kim Jang-soo at an 11:00 
handover ceremony on November 24 (Seoul Time).  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  (C) On November 22, the Ambassador paid an office call on 
outgoing ROK Minister of National Defense Yoon, Kwang-ung. 
He thanked Minister Yoon for his leadership, his contribution 
to enhancing South Korea's global role, particularly in Iraq 
and Afghanistan, and his support for the alliance, and for 
the significant transformation that had taken place on Yoon's 
watch.  The Ambassador commented that troop contributions by 
the Republic of Korea (ROK) in Iraq, Afghanistan, and perhaps 
soon in Lebanon as well, serve to counter the pessimism too 
often on display by the media.  Yoon said he appreciated the 
Ambassador's efforts as well, during what he termed a 
"complicated time" in the history of the Alliance. 
 
Iraq Renewal 
------------ 
 
¶3.  (C) On Iraq, the Ambassador pointed out that the work of 
the ROK's Zaytun unit in Irbil was seen as a model by U.S. 
military commanders.  He said he hoped the ROK troops would 
not be departing too soon, as there was still a need for the 
good work they are performing in support of reconstruction in 
the north.  Yoon replied that President Roh faced a difficult 
time and would have to make a great effort to get the renewal 
legislation approved by the National Assembly.  He told the 
Ambassador his ministry had taken great pains not to say 
anything to the media about the prospects for renewal until 
President Bush and President Roh had discussed the matter at 
their November 18 meeting in Hanoi.  "The final decision will 
 
be entirely up to our President," Yoon said. 
 
UNIFIL 
------ 
 
¶4.  (C) The Ambassador cited the expected ROK decision to 
send troops to Lebanon as yet another example of South 
Korea's increasingly active role in the world.  Yoon informed 
him that the ROK government had recently reached a 
coordinated inter-agency agreement to recommend to the 
National Assembly that the ROK send 450 troops to Lebanon. 
The number, he said, would be no higher than that because 
that was roughly the number of troops China was currently 
contributing to UNIFIL.  It would be awkward for the ROK to 
send more troops than China, Yoon explained. 
 
New Defense Minister 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Minister Yoon described his successor, Kim Jang-soo 
(bio information in reftel), as very familiar with security 
policy issues.  Cryptically, Yoon said it was important to 
respect the fact that each individual brought a different 
approach to their ministerial duties.  He advised the 
Ambassador to extend the same level of professional courtesy 
to Minister-designate Kim that he had shown all along.  The 
Ambassador noted that USFK Commander General Bell had spoken 
highly of General Kim.  He said he looked forward to having a 
constructive partnership with him. 
 
OPCON Transfer 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Pointing to important work that remains to be done, 
the Ambassador stressed the need for both governments to 
designate a specific date -- within the window agreed to at 
the Security Consultative Meeting in October -- to get the 
process for transferring wartime operational control (OPCON) 
underway in 2007.  Yoon agreed that a specific timetable must 
be set during the first half of 2007.  He predicted there 
would be disagreement between the ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff 
and USFK on the issue, but expressed optimism that over 50 
years of good Alliance relations "will aid us well" to reach 
an agreement.  "It would be very helpful for the stronger 
partner (USG) to show more leniency," Yoon advised. 
 
Camp Returns 
------------ 
 
¶7.  (C) In response to a warning by the Ambassador that if 
the camp return issue continues to drag on, it could get 
mixed up in the 2007 Korean national election, Yoon announced 
that he had put his signature to 14 of the camp returns the 
previous day.  He said he did so with a feeling of "great 
responsibility" and the philosophy that resolving the issue 
as quickly as possible was the best solution for the sake of 
the Alliance.  Yoon cautioned that the Ministry of the 
Environment (MOE) sought further information from USFK on the 
remaining camp returns.  Yoon blamed these delays on the 
younger generation who did not understand all the United 
States had done for Korea.  The Ambassador replied that there 
was also an insufficient understanding among the broader 
Korean populace about the U.S.-ROK Status of Forces Agreement 
(SOFA), which provided the basis for our position on 
environmental issues.  He pointed out that USFK is, in fact, 
doing more than the SOFA requires. 
 
Jikdo Range 
----------- 
 
¶8.  (C) The Ambassador thanked Minister Yoon for his efforts 
to complete the WISS (electronic scoring) installation on the 
Jikdo air-to-surface training range.  Yoon lamented the fact 
that weather conditions had now slowed construction, saying 
he received a report the day before that the project would 
"realistically" not be completed until February 2007.  He 
 
said he had attended his last cabinet meeting the previous 
day where he had thanked Prime Minister Han Myung-sook for 
her valuable assistance in bringing along local authorities 
in both Jikdo and the relocation of Yongsan Garrison to 
Pyongtaek. 
 
PSI 
--- 
 
¶9.  (C) Noting that MND had taken a more positive view of the 
ROK's role in the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) 
than some other parts of the Korean government, the 
Ambassador urged the ministry to continue to make the case 
for full participation in PSI.  The political debate over 
that issue has been too emotional, the Ambassador commented, 
adding that if Korean officials focused on the facts, they 
would realize they could have endorsed PSI while doing only 
what they are already committed to do to support it.  Both 
agreed that, in time, the ROKG could perhaps be convinced of 
that. 
 
North Korean Nuclear Test 
------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (C) The Ambassador similarly praised MND's strong voice 
against the North Korean nuclear test.  He pointed out that 
while it appears the Six-Party Talks will resume shortly, 
there is no certainty the DPRK will voluntarily give up its 
nuclear weapons.  U.S.-ROK teamwork is therefore very 
important, the Ambassador urged, adding he was glad President 
Bush and President Roh had been able to meet at APEC on 
November 18 to bring our approaches together.  Describing the 
road ahead as a very difficult one, Yoon provided what he 
called the "simple thought" that the DPRK would in fact 
oppose progress toward a peace regime because Kim Jong-il 
used North Korean fear of the United States as a primary 
justification for the continuation of his own 
military-centered dictatorship. 
 
¶11.  (C) The Ambassador agreed the Six-Party negotiations 
would be a difficult journey.  He pointed out that while we 
will seek early, concrete steps by North Korea to 
denuclearize, the DPRK will want to postpone having to take 
those steps for as long as possible.  Yoon expressed the 
belief that peace was nonetheless possible in the long run, 
as it would be the natural course of events for Kim Jong-il's 
hold on power to weaken over time. 
 
Time For A Rest 
--------------- 
 
¶12.  (C) Minister Yoon concluded by noting the Ambassador 
would be the final foreign dignitary with whom he would be 
meeting as Defense Minister.  (NOTE: His staff informed us 
the U.S. Ambassador was the only foreign ambassador to ask 
for a farewell call on Minister Yoon.  END NOTE).  Yoon noted 
the Ambassador had come to Seoul during a particularly 
tumultuous period of time, within South Korea as well as in 
the North.  "You have had to do so much, I hope it hasn't 
affected your health," he said.  The Ambassador replied that 
events of the past year had made it an interesting time, but 
that he thought the important trends were now moving in a 
positive direction, and that a sense of solidarity seemed to 
be building up between the U.S. and South Korean people.  He 
asked Yoon what was the first thing he planned to do after 
handing over his responsibilities to Kim Jang-soon on 
November 24.  "My wife and I will be going into the 
countryside for a rest," Yoon replied with a broad smile. 
VERSHBOW
</file>