^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3767  |  2006-11-01 11:08  |  비밀(2급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PARM PREL MNUC KS KN }}  |
====== 제 목: 한국, 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(PSI) 승인하지 않은 채 참여 확대하겠다고 제안 ======
비 밀 SEOUL 003767 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))
국방부망 배포
동아시아 태평양 F/O, 군비통제국제안보담당 부장관, 그리고 국제안보비핵산국에 전달 바람.((PLEASE PASS TO EAP F/O, T AND ISN )).

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 10/31/2016 
태그: PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), MNUC(([Military Nuclear Applications])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)]))
제 목: 한국, 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(PSI) 승인하지 않은 채 참여 확대하겠다고 제안
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사  근거: 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/09/11 05:51//
===== 요점 =====

1. (비밀) 11월 1일 박선원 청와대 통일외교안보전략비서관은 한국의 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(이하 PSI) 참여 목적의 새로운 제안의 윤곽을 제시하였다. 남한정부가 10월 9일 북한 핵무기 실험에 대한 3가지 대처방안을 곧 발표할 거라고 말하였다: 1) 한국정부는 유엔안보리 결의안 1718호와 일치하는 조치 단행; 2) 한국 정부의 단독적인 징벌 조치; 그리고 한국의 PSI 참여 확대. 박선원은 앞에 두 가지에 대해 자세한 설명은 없었지만, 3주간의 가열된 정치 공방 이후, 한국은 PSI 참여를 확대한다고 제안하였다. 해당 발표의 핵심 구절을 읽어보면: “한국 정부는 정보 교환과 자산 기여, 그리고 관련 회의의 참여를 통해 PSI 참여 범위를 계속 확대할 것이다.” 박선원은 자신의 제안은 북한과의 군사적 충돌 유발하거나 국내 격렬한 반응을 불러일으키지 않고도 한국이 PSI 참여를 확대하도록 고안된 제안임을 분명히 하였다. 그러한 여러 우려 때문에, 한국 정부는 PSI 차단 원칙을 승인하지 않기로 하였으나, 한국은 정보 공유, 한국 항만의 철저한 감시의 확대, 한국 영해에 밖에서 대량살상무기를 운반하는 여하한 북한 선박의 차단을 지원 등을 위하여 미합중국 그리고 다른 국가들과 긴밀히 협조할 의사가 있음을 시사하였다.

2. (비밀) 대사와의 후속 대화에서 송민순은 현시점에 PSI 차단 원칙 승인이 공개 토론장에서 해상 차단에 한국이 개입하는 것과 동일시되는 관계로 과도한 조치라고 강조하였다. 그러나 한국은 모든 PSI 활동에 전면 참여할 거라고 송민순은 덧붙였다. 대사는 PSI “전면 참여”는 차단 원칙을 승인하는 국가들에게만 해당한다며, 미 문제 해결에 계속 작업해 달라고 촉구하였다.

===== 한국정부 북한 핵실험 대처방안 준비 =====

3. (비밀) 2006년 11월 1일 공관차석과 정치군사팀장은 박선원 청와대 통일외교안보전략비서관의 요청으로 남한 정부의 대량살상무기 확산방지구상 참여에 관한 임박한 정책 발표를 소개받기 위해 그와 함께 회동하였다. 박선원은 동아태 힐 차관보와 북한 상대역 김계관, 그리고 중국 우다웨이 외교부 부부장 간의 10월 31일 베이징 회동에 나서기로 한 미국 정부의 결정에 대해 감사를 표하면서 시작하였다.

4. (비밀) 박선원 박사는 남한 정부가 북한의 10월 9일 핵무기 실험에 대한 대응 조치를 곧 발표할 거라고 말하였다. 동 발표는 세 가지 부분이 있다고 그는 말하였다:
  * 한국정부가 단행할 조치는 유엔안보리 1718호와 일관성을 유지한다;
  * 한국정부는 단독적인 징벌 조치를 단행할 예정이다: 그리고
  * 한국은 PSI 참여를 확대한다.
박선원은 앞에 두 가지 발표가 수반하는 내용에 대해 자세히 설명하지는 않았지만, 대신에 한국의 새로운 PSI 제안을 설명하는 데 관심을 돌렸다.

===== 가열된 정치 논쟁 =====

5. (비밀) 박 박사는 지난 3주 동안 한국 정부 내에서 남한 정부가 PSI 참여와 지원를 확대할지, 한다면 어떻게 할지를 두고 치열한 유관 기관 사이 열띤 논의가 벌어졌다고 지적하였다. 그는 여당인 열린우리당 지도부가 논의에 개입하는 방식은 “도움이 안 됐지만" 정부가 그들의 의견을 이해하는데 "필요"했다고 말하였다. 이 문제에 관한 “다양한 목소리가” 있다; 일부는 전면적인 PSI 참여가 상책이라고 믿는가 하면, 다른 이들은 더 조심스러워 하는데, 그들조차도 PSI는 적법한 활동으로 보며, 한국이 국제 사회의 비확산 노력에 더 중요한 소임을 해야만 한다고 믿는다고 박선원은 설명하였다. 왜 한국이 PSI에 대해 조심스러운 접근을 하는지 다양한 근거를 들며 계속 설명하였다. 남북 관계는 까다롭고 한반도는 해상 분쟁을 비롯해 비무장지대 군사분계선을 따라 군사적 충돌 잠재성이 있는 예측 불허의 장소라고 자세히 설명하였다. 그는 1999년과 2002년 남북한의 해상 충돌을 언급하였다. 남한은 북한에 굴복하는 게 아니며, 남한이 취할 행동에 대해 북한이 어떤 반발을 할지 조심스럽게 살펴봐야만 함을 이해해 달라고 간청하면서, 남한은 엄밀히 말해 여전히 북한과 전쟁 상태이라고 했다.

===== 대량살상무기 확산방지구상 지원 확대 =====

6. (비밀) 박선원 박사는 공관차석에게 한국의 PSI 참여 확대 발표를 준비해왔다며, 아직 사전 초안일 뿐이지만, 자신이 그 내용을 통일외교안보수석과 외교통상부 장관 내정자 송민순과 논의해왔다고 강조하였다. 박선원은 한 페이지 초안을 내줄 수는 없다고 말하면서, 공관 차석에 잃어 주었다. 그 내용의 서두는 대량살상무기 확산을 중단시키겠다는 한국의 다짐을 강조하고 있으며, 계속 이어서 한국정부는 핵확산금지조약과 미사일 기술 통제 체제, 그리고 와세나협정 등 다자간의 비확산 체제에 적극적으로 참여하고 해왔다고 말을 이었다. 한국은 마찬가지로 PSI의 목적을 지지하였고, PSI 연습에 참관자로 참여한 바 있다고 박선원을 말을 이었다. (주석: 가장 최근에 한국은 10월 29일~31일 페르시아 걸프만에서 열린 리딩 에지 연습에 3명의 참관인을 파견하였다. 주석 끝.)그 결과 한국은 이미 PSI에 "가입"한 걸로 믿고 있다고 박선원은 주장하였다.

7. (비밀) 노 대통령은 6자 회담에 의한 북한의 비핵화를 통해서 “수직 확산”를 막고 큰 비중을 두고 있을 뿐만 아니라, PSI 활용을 통해서 대량살상무기의 “수평 확산”을 저지하는 지구적 노력도 역시 지지하고 있다고 박선원 박사는 말하였다. 그러므로 “한국 정부는 정보 교환과 자산 기여, 그리고 관련 회의의 참여를 통해 PSI 참여 범위를 계속 확대할 것이다.” 박선원은 “그와 더불어 한국 정부는 이미 한국의 항구 안팎으로 테러 관련 무기의 흐름을 제한하는 철저한 조사를 이미 수행하고 있으며, 그런 노력을 계속 강화할 것”이라고 덧붙였다.

8. (비밀) 자신의 제안은 북한과의 군사적 충돌이나 국내 비판을 야기하지 않고 한국의 PSI 참여를 늘리기 위한 시도임을 분명히 하면서, 어떻게 하면 “대량살상무기 확산을 멈추겠다는 남한의 확고한 의지와 분단국가라는 한반도의 특수성 사이 타협”할 것인지 면밀히 점검하고 있다고 박선원은 설명하였다.

===== 그러나 차단원칙은 승인하지 않는다 =====

9. (비밀) 한국이 PSI 차단 원칙을 승인할 것인지 아닌지 공관차석이 압박을 가하자, 박선원은 그 내용은 한국이 발표할 사안이 아님을 분명히 시사했다. “승인은 한국어로 매우 강한 용어”라며, 그 이유는 법정 책임을 암시하기 때문이라고 그는 주장하였다. 공관차석은 PSI 회원국은 자국의 법적 권한과 국제적인 약정의 범위 안에서 행동이 자유롭다고 대답하였다. 박선원은 그 내용을 알고 있는 듯 보였지만, PSI의 승인은 대표적인 정치가들의 눈에는 너무 나가는 걸로 보일 것이며, 그의 상관들은 국내 논쟁을 잠재우길 원한다고 시사하였다.

10. (비밀) 한국이 다양한 확산 시나리오에 어떻게 대처할지 한층 압박을 가하자, 박선원은 만일 북한 안팎으로 대량살상무기가 운반되고 있다는 믿을 만한 제보를 받는다면, 한국 정부는 그 정보를 미합중국과 공유할 것이고, 한국의 수역 밖에서 진행되는 한 의심되는 선박을 미국이 차단하길 원한다. 만일 선박이 당신 내 수역을 통과하고 있다면, 어떻게 할 것인가? 라고 공관차석은 물었다. (북한 선박이 공해 상에 도달할 때까지는) “그때는 우리는 잠시 기다리라고 요청하게 된다.”

11. (비밀) 공관차석은 박 박사가 그의 제안을 미국 정부와 공유해준 점에 감사하였다. 공관차석은 PSI 참여와 지원의 수준을 늘리겠다는 한국의 의지를 환영하였다. 그러나 공관차석은 미국은 한국이 여전히 PSI 차단 원칙 승인하지 않는다는 소식에 실망할 공산이 크다고 주의를 당부하였다. 공관차석은 PSI는 세계 전역에 77개국이 참여하는 중요한 국제적인 노력이며; PSI는 회원국의 권한과 국제적인 약정이 상충하는 요구를 한국에 하지 않으며; 전면적으로 PSI 승인하지 못함으로써 한국 정부가 대량살상무기의 확산을 용납하지 않겠다는 신호를 북한에 보낼 기회를 놓치고 있다고 강조하였다.

12. (비밀) 남한 정부 안의 계속되는 유관 부처 간의 논쟁을 입증이라고 하듯이, 박선원 박사는 자신의 초안 발표 내용을 한국 외교통상부와 공유하지 말라고 우리에게 요청하였다.

===== 논평 =====

13. (비밀) 논평: 국무장관의 10월 방한 중에 PSI에 가입하라는 국무장관의 요청에 응대하기 위해 노력한 점은 분명하다. 그러나 국내 정치 상황을 고려할 때, 노무현 정부는 현재로선 이보다 그 이상 나가길 원하지 않는다. 물론 노무현의 견해는 한국 사회 내부 PSI에 대한 이해 증진을 저해해 왔다. 이는 특히 10월 31일에 베이징에서 북한과 회담에서 우리가 보여준 노력에 비춰 실망스러운 결과이다. 대사관은 한국에 불만족스럽다고 응수하고, 청와대가 PSI를 전면적으로 승인하도록 지속적인 압박을 권장한다. 논평 끝.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3767|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 및 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 06SEOUL3767.rtf>
S E C R E T SEOUL 003767 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO EAP F/O, T AND ISN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2016 
TAGS: PARM [Arms Controls and Disarmament], PREL [External Political Relations], MNUC [Military Nuclear Applications], KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)] 
SUBJECT: ROK OFFERS TO EXPAND PSI PARTICIPATION, WITHOUT 
ENDORSING PSI 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR ALEXANDER R. VERSHBOW.  REASON: 1.4 (b/d). 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (S) On November 1, Park Sun-won, Secretary to the 
President for National Security Strategy, outlined for the 
DCM a new ROK proposal for its participation in PSI.  He said 
the South Korean Government would soon announce three 
responses to the October 9 North Korean nuclear weapons test: 
 1) Measures the ROK government will take consistent with 
UNSCR 1718; 2) Unilateral ROKG punitive measures; and 3) 
Expanded ROK participation in PSI.  Park did not elaborate on 
the first two, but said that after three weeks of heated 
political debate, the ROK proposed to increase ROK 
participation in PSI.  The key line of its announcement would 
read:  "The Korean government will continue to expand its 
scope of participation in PSI through information exchange, 
asset contribution, and participation in related meetings." 
Park made it clear his proposal was designed to increase ROK 
participation in PSI without provoking a military clash with 
the North or arousing a domestic outcry.  Because of those 
concerns, Park said the ROKG had decided it would not endorse 
the PSI Statement of Interdiction Principles, but indicated 
the ROK was willing to work closely with the United States 
and others to share intelligence, more closely monitor its 
own ports, and support the interdiction of any North Korean 
vessels transporting WMD, provided the interdiction took 
place outside of Korean territorial waters. 
 
¶2.  (S) In a follow-on conversation with the Ambassador, 
National Security Advisor Song Min-soon underscored that 
endorsing the PSI principles was a bridge too far at this 
point since it was equated to ROK involvement in maritime 
interdiction in the public debate.  But the ROK would fully 
participate in all PSI activities, Song added.  The 
Ambassador pushed back, saying "full participation" in PSI 
was only for countries that endorsed the principles, and 
urged Song to keep working the issue. 
 
ROKG Preparing Response to DPRK Nuclear Test 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S) On November 1, 2006, the DCM and POL-MIL Chief met 
with Secretary to the President for National Security 
Strategy Dr. Park Sun-won (at Park's request) to receive a 
preview of the South Korean Government's soon-to-be announced 
policy on participation in the Proliferation Security 
Initiative (PSI).  Park began by expressing appreciation for 
the U.S. Government's decision to go forward with the October 
31 meeting in Beijing among EAP Assistant Secretary Hill, his 
North Korean counterpart Kim Gye-gwan, and Chinese VFM Wu 
Dawei. 
 
¶4.  (S) Dr. Park stated that the South Korean Government 
would soon announce the measures it will take in response to 
the North Korean nuclear weapons test of October 9.  There 
would be three parts to that announcement, he said: 
 
-- Measures the ROK government will take consistent with 
UNSCR 1718; 
-- Unilateral punitive measures the ROK government will take; 
and 
-- Expanded ROK participation in PSI. 
 
Park did not elaborate on what the first two announcements 
would entail, but instead turned his attention to explaining 
the new ROK proposal on PSI. 
 
Heated Political Debate 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S) Dr. Park noted that intense inter-agency discussions 
had been taking place during the past three weeks within the 
ROKG over whether, and how, to increase South Korea's support 
for, and participation in, PSI.  He said that ruling Uri 
Party leaders had intervened in that discussion in ways that 
were "not helpful, but were necessary" for the government to 
gain their understanding.  There were "many voices" on the 
issue; some believed full participation in PSI was the best 
option, others were more cautious, but even they viewed PSI 
as a legitimate activity and believed the ROK had to play a 
more important role in the nonproliferation efforts of the 
international community, Park explained.  He went on to 
describe various reasons why the ROK was taking a cautious 
approach toward PSI.  North-South relations were tricky and 
the Korean Peninsula was a volatile place, with the potential 
for military clashes along the DMZ, Military Demarcation 
 
Line, as well as within disputed maritime boundaries, Park 
elaborated.  He cited North-South clashes at sea in 1999 and 
2002 as examples.  Please understand, Park pleaded, that 
South Korea was not capitulating to the North, but had to 
consider carefully what the DPRK's reaction might be to any 
actions they took, adding that South Korea is still 
technically in a state of war with the North. 
 
Expanded Support For PSI 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (S) Dr. Park told the DCM he had prepared an announcement 
of increased ROK participation in PSI, stressing that it was 
only a preliminary draft, but that he had discussed its 
content with National Security Advisor, and Foreign 
Minister-designate, Song Min-soon.  He said he was unable to 
hand over the one page draft, but then read it to the DCM. 
It began by emphasizing the ROK's commitment to halt the 
proliferation of WMD, and went on to say the ROKG was 
actively taking part in various multilateral nonproliferation 
regimes, including NPT, MTCR, and Wassenaar.  The ROK 
likewise supported PSI's objectives and had taken part as an 
observer in PSI exercises, Park continued. (NOTE: Most 
recently, the ROK sent a three-person observer team to the 
October 29-31 LEADING EDGE exercise in the Persian Gulf.  END 
NOTE).  As a result, the ROK believed it was already 
"participating" in PSI, Park asserted. 
 
¶7.  (S) Continuing, Dr. Park said that President Roh put the 
highest value on stopping "vertical proliferation" through 
denuclearization of the DPRK via the Six-Party Talks, as well 
as supporting the global effort to prevent "horizontal 
proliferation" of WMD through the use of PSI.  Therefore, 
Park read, "The Korean government will continue to expand its 
scope of participation in PSI through information exchange, 
asset contribution, and participation in related meetings." 
He added that "Furthermore, the ROKG is already conducting 
thorough inspections to restrict the flow of terror-related 
weapons into and out of its ports, and will continue to 
strengthen such efforts." 
 
¶8.  (S) Making it clear his proposal was an attempt to 
increase ROK participation in PSI without causing a military 
clash with the North, or domestic criticism, Park explained 
that he had carefully examined how to "compromise between 
South Korea's firm commitment to halt proliferation of WMD 
and the particularity of the Korean Peninsula and its divided 
nation." 
 
But Will Not Endorse Statement of Interdiction Principles 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶9.  (S) Pressed by the DCM on whether or not the ROK would 
also endorse the PSI Statement of Interdiction Principles, 
Park clearly indicated that would not be an element of the 
ROK announcement.  "Endorse" was a very strong term in the 
Korean language," he claimed, because it implied a new legal 
obligation.  The DCM replied that PSI participants were free 
to act within the confines of their own national legal 
authorities and international commitments.  Park appeared 
aware of this point, but indicated that endorsement of PSI 
would be seen as going too far in the eyes of key political 
players, and his leaders wanted to quell the domestic debate. 
 
 
¶10.  (S) Pressed further on how the ROK would respond to 
various proliferation scenarios, Park said that if credible 
intelligence were received that WMD was being shipped to or 
from North Korea, the ROKG would share that information with 
the United States and would want us to interdict the suspect 
vessel, provided it was done outside Korean territorial 
waters.  What if the ship was passing within your territorial 
waters?, the DCM asked.  "Then we would ask you to wait a few 
hours" (until the DPRK ship reached the high seas), Park 
replied. 
 
¶11.  (S) The DCM thanked Dr. Park for sharing his proposal 
with the USG.  He welcomed ROK willingness to increase the 
level of its support for, and involvement in, PSI.  He 
cautioned, however, that Washington would likely be 
disappointed to hear the ROK remained unwilling to endorse 
the PSI Statement of Interdiction Principles.  He stressed 
that PSI remained an important international effort involving 
77 countries around the world; that PSI made no demands on 
the ROK inconsistent with its national authorities and 
international commitments; and that by failing to endorse PSI 
fully, the ROKG was missing an opportunity to send a signal 
to North Korea that it would not tolerate proliferation of 
 
weapons of mass destruction. 
 
¶12.  (S) Evidencing the continuing interagency debate within 
the South Korean government, Dr. Park asked us not to share 
the content of his draft announcement with the ROK Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 
 
¶13.  (S) COMMENT:  It is clear the ROK had made an effort to 
respond to the Secretary's request to join PSI delivered 
during her October visit to Seoul.  Given the domestic 
political situation, however, the Roh Administration does not 
want to go any further than this, at least for now.  Of 
course Roh's own views have impeded a better understanding of 
PSI within Korean society.  This is a disappointing outcome, 
particularly in light of the effort we made in meeting with 
the DPRK in Beijing on October 31.  Embassy recommends we 
reply to the ROK with dissatisfaction and continue to press 
the Blue House to fully endorse PSI.  END COMMENT. 
VERSHBOW
</file>