<WRAP center round info 90%>//**정확한 번역은 이곳에서 이용 바람**//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/4/06seoul3104|제 목: 미 대사, 9월 6일에 윤광웅 국방장관 면담]] //포와로 탐정의 번역// (구글 검색을 회피하기 위한 방편이니 양해 바랍니다.)
</WRAP>
^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  06SEOUL3104  |  2006-09-08 14:32  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PARM PREL MNUC KS KN }} |
====== 제 목: 미 대사, 9월 6일에 윤광웅 국방장관 면담 ======

작성일 : 2006년 9월 8일


C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003104 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO EAP A/S HILL ON TRAVEL IN BEIJING 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2016 
TAGS: PARM PREL MNUC KS KN
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S SEP 6 MEETING WITH DEFENSE MINISTER 
YOON 

Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW. REASONS 1.4 (b/d) 

요약: 9월 6일 대사와 회동에서, 국방부 윤광웅 장관은 전시작전권 이양에 대한 한국 사회의 광범위한 논란을 인용하면서 미국 정부가 2012년을 시행 연도로 합의해야 한다고 강력하게 촉구했다. 2009년을 밀어붙이기 보다는 2012년이어야 한다는 것이다. 그는 2012년에 대한 합의는 한국을 조용하게 만들 수 있고, 퇴역장성들과 우려의 목소리를 내는 다른 사람들로 하여금 전작권 이양을 완전히 지지하게 만들 수 있다고 말했다. 대사는 한국 관리들이 전작권 이양 문제의 초점을 잘못된 개념에서 벗어나도록 노력하는데 둬야 한다고 말했다. 즉 한국이 “주권을 되찾는 것”이라는 개념은 잘못된 것이라는 것이다. 대신 미국 한국 동맹의 힘과 중요성을 강조하고 좀 더 균형 잡힌 협력자 관계가 된다는 점을 강조해야 한다고 대사는 제안했다.

¶1. (C) SUMMARY: During a September 6 discussion with the 
Ambassador, Minister of National Defense Yoon Kwang-ung cited 
widespread controversy within Korean society over the 
transfer of OPCON issue and strongly urged the USG to agree 
to 2012 as the X year, rather than pressing for 2009. He 
predicted that an agreement on 2012 would calm Korea and that 
retired generals and others voicing concern would come to 
fully support its implementation. The Ambassador suggested 
that Korean officials strive to shift the focus of the OPCON 
transfer debate away from the false notion that Korea is 
"regaining its sovereignty" to instead emphasize the strength 
and importance of the U.S.-ROK Alliance and the fact that it 
was becoming a more balanced partnership. 

1시간에 걸친 회동에서 윤장관은 북한 핵위협에 대한 긴밀한 논의를 촉구했다; 그리고 한국은 E-X 획득을 위해 보잉사가 주장한 가격을 수용하기 위해 국방비를 늘릴 입장이 아니라고 주장했다; SMA 논의는 올해 말을 넘어서까지 연장될 수 있다고 환기시켰다; 그리고 직도 공대지 사격장을 지키기 위해 그가 할 수 있는 모든 일을 하고 있다고 맹세했다; 그리고 레바논의 평화유지군에 한국군을 파견하는 것, 이라크 주둔을 연장하는 것에 대한 한국 정부의 결정은 레바논과 이라크의 육상 보안상황에 대한 추가적인 평가를 기다리는 것이라고 설명했다. 윤장관은 9월 14일 워싱턴에서 열리는 정상회담은 미국 한국 동맹의 계속된 힘을 보여주는 것이고, 이와 함께 미국 한국 관계에서 다른 긍정적 진전상황을 부각하는 것이 될 것이라는 대사의 희망에 대해 공감을 표시했다.

¶2. (C) During the hour-long meeting, Minister Yoon also 
urged close consultation on the North Korean nuclear threat; 
claimed the ROK is in no position to increase spending to 
accommodate Boeing's price for procurement of the E-X; 
cautioned that SMA negotiations could stretch beyond the end 
of this year; pledged that he is doing everything in his 
power to secure the Jikdo air-to-surface training range; and 
explained that ROKG decisions on troop contributions to 
UNIFIL in Lebanon and troop extension in Iraq would await 
further assessments of the security situation on the ground 
in both countries. Minister Yoon shared the Ambassador's 
hope that the September 14 summit meeting in Washington will 
serve to demonstrate the continuing strength of the U.S.-ROK 
Alliance as well as highlighting other positive developments 
in U.S.-South Korean relations. END SUMMARY. 

OPCON TRANSFER 
-------------- 
전시작전권 이양
대사는 9월 6일 국방부 윤광웅 장관의 요청에 따라 윤장관과 만남을 가졌다. 이번 만남은 전작권 이양 시기를 2012년으로 하는데 미국 정부가 동의해달라는 말로 시작해 이 말로 끝났다. 이보다 더 앞서 이양하는 쪽으로 미국 정부가 밀어붙이지 말라는 것이다. 작전권 이양이 한국을 미국 “버리는 것”과 사실상 같다는 우려들이 여당과 야당 국회의원들로부터 광범위한 반대로 이어지고 있다는 것이다. 또 한국 사회와 언론의 많은 보수 그룹들도 그처럼 반대하고 있다. 윤국방장관은 조기 이양을 옹호하는 사람들은 장기적으로 이양을 바라는 사람들과 마찬가지로 미국 한국 동맹의 건강에 진지하게 매달리고 있다고 말했다. 그러나 그 자신의 믿음은 “2012년이 동맹에 훨씬 좋다는 것이다”라고 그는 강조했다. 

¶3. (C) The Ambassador met on September 6 with ROK Minister 
for National Defense Yoon Kwang-ung at the latter's request. 
The meeting began and ended with Yoon strongly urging the 
U.S. Government to agree to 2012 as the year for the transfer 
of operational control, rather than pressing for an earlier 
transition. Concerns that transfer of OPCON equates to U.S. 
"abandonment" of the Republic of Korea have led to widespread 
opposition from both ruling and opposition party members, as 
well as numerous conservative groups throughout Korean 
society and the media. MND Yoon said he believed that those 
advocating early transfer, as well as those calling for a 
longer period of transition, were sincerely committed to the 
health of the U.S.-ROK Alliance, but stressed his own belief 
that "2012 would be much better for the Alliance." 

대사는 모든 측면에서 제기되는 우려를 인정했다. 그는 럼즈펠드 미 국방장관과 군부 지휘관들이 이양이 3년 안에 끝날 수 있다는 확신을 갖고 있다고 말했다. 그러나 우리는 이양이 얼마나 빨리 이뤄져야 하는지에 관해 양국의 합의를 분명히 필요로 하고 있다. 대사는 자신이 가장 걱정하는 것은 동맹의 진화에 있어 가장 긍정적으로 비춰지는 것이 무엇이냐는 것이다. 한국 사회에서 그토록 많은 논란과 우려를 낳고 있는 동맹에서 말이다. 그는 한국 관리들이 논쟁의 초점을 잘못된 관점에서 벗어나도록 하기 위해 노력해야 한다고 말했다. 한국이 “주권을 되찾는다”는 식의 잘못된 관점 대신, 미국 한국 동맹의 힘과 중요성, 좀 더 균형 잡힌 협력관계로 가고 있다는 사실 등을 강조해야 한다고 그는 제안했다. 
¶4. (C) The Ambassador acknowledged the concerns expressed 
from all sides. He stated that SECDEF Rumsfeld and U.S. 
military commanders were convinced the transfer could be 
completed in three years, but we obviously needed mutual 
agreement on how fast the transition should take. The 
Ambassador added that what concerned him most was that what 
should be seen as a positive development in the evolution of 
the Alliance was generating so much controversy and anxiety 
in Korean society. He suggested that Korean officials strive 
to shift the focus of the debate away from the false notion 
that Korea was "regaining its sovereignty" to instead 
emphasize the strength and importance of the U.S.-ROK 
Alliance, and the fact it was becoming a more balanced 
partnership. 

윤장관은 국회에서 이 문제에 관해 추후 답변을 요구 받을 때, 대사의 말을 기억할 것이라고 말하면서 이에 동의했다. “미국과 한국이 공유하는 가치들은 기본적으로 우리가 같은 길 위에 있다는 걸 의미한다고 느낀다”고 윤은 말했다. “그를 바탕으로 해, 우리는 우리의 동맹을 유지하고 발전시키기 위해 같이 노력해야 한다고 나는 생각한다.” 윤은 계속해서 2009년 이양 문제의 “정치화”에 대한 우려를 표명했다. 그는 국회 내에서 철저한 토론은 이 문제를 푸는 가장 민주적인 방법이라고 믿는다면서 그렇게 말했다. 대사는 윤이 최근 미국의 “연계 능력” 제공에 관해서 말한 데 대해 감사를 표시했다. 대사는 한국 정부가 좀 더 폭넓게 그 같은 확신을 대중들에게 확산시키는 것은 유용한 일이라고 말했다. 윤은 “2012년”에 한국 정부는 SPI 10으로 진입하고, 워싱턴에서 열리는 MCM/SCM 회담에 들어가게 되는 입장이라고 말했다. 그는 미국과 한국이 적절한 “시행 연도”에 대한 합의에 일단 도달하면 이 문제는 한국에서는 상당히 조용해질 것이라고 자신있게 예측했다. 그리고 퇴역 장성과 반대의 목소리를 내는 다른 사람들도 그 같은 계획의 실행을 전적으로 지지하게 될 것이라고 예측했다. 

¶5. (C) Minister Yoon agreed, commenting that he would 
remember the Ambassador's words when next called to answer 
questions on the issue at the National Assembly. "I feel the 
values shared by the United States and the ROK means we are 
essentially on the same path," Yoon said. "With that as our 
base, I think we should work together to sustain and develop 
our Alliance." Yoon went on to express concern over the 
"politicization" of a 2009 transfer, stating that he believed 
a thorough discussion within the National Assembly was the 
most democratic way to resolve the issue. The Ambassador 
thanked Yoon for recent comments he had made regarding U.S. 
provision of "bridging capabilities," noting that it would be 
useful for the ROKG to more broadly disseminate that 
reassurance to the public. Yoon stated that "2012" would be 
the ROK position going into SPI 10 and the MCM/SCM meetings 
in Washington. He confidently predicted that once the United 
States and the ROK reach agreement on an appropriate "X 
Year," the issue would calm down considerably in Korea, and 
that retired generals and others now voicing opposition would 
come to fully support implementation of the plan. 

DPRK NUCLEAR ISSUE 
------------------ 
북한 핵 문제
잠깐 북한 핵문제로 화제를 돌려, 윤장관은 대사에게 전작권 문제에 관계없이 미국과 한국이, 북한의 핵위협이 점차 우려를 커지게 하고 있는 상황에서 긴밀하게 협력하는 것이 중요하다고 말했다. 
¶6. (C) Turning briefly to the North Korea nuclear issue, 
Minister Yoon told the Ambassador that, regardless of the 
OPCON issue, it was important for the United States and South 
Korea to consult closely as the threat of a North Korean 
nuclear test appeared to be a growing concern. 

BOEING E-X PROCUREMENT (AWACS) 
----------------------------- 
보잉의 조기 경보기 E-X 구매
윤장관은 한국정부와 보잉사 간에 보잉의 E-X(에이왁스 공중조기경보기) 가격 정책을 둘러싼 논란 문제를 제기했다. 한국의 국방 예산과 보잉의 현재 가격은 “전혀 비교할 수 없을 정도로 차이가 크다”며, 한국은 조기경보기 구입에 추가적으로 예산 지출을 늘릴 수 있는 입장이 아니라고 주장했다. 대사는 한국 정부가 보잉을 선택한 데 대해 기쁘다고 말했다. 왜냐면 그 것은 최고 수준의 작전수행능력과 최고의 성능을 제공하기 때문이다. 이는 전작권을 이양하는 상황에서 특히 중요하다. 그는 국방부가 합의된 가격을 뽑아내기 위해 보잉측과 직접 협상하기를 권했다. 대사는 윤장관에게7월 1일 까지 보잉의 하청업자들 가격은 이미 보장이 된 상태이기 때문에 한국 정부는 가격이 더 오를 수 있다고 경고를 받은 상황임을 상기시켰다. 불행히도 한국은 구매 결정을 하는데 매우 오랜 시간을 끌었다. 대사는 계속해 협의하라고 촉구하며, 자신은 이 문제가 곧 해결되는 것을 매우 보고 싶다고 덧붙였다. 

¶7. (C) Minister Yoon raised the current pricing dispute 
between the ROKG and Boeing over ROK procurement of the E-X 
(AWACS) planes. Calling the ROK defense budget and Boeing's 
current price "disparate," Yoon claimed the ROK was not in a 
position to further increase spending for the project. The 
Ambassador said he was pleased the ROKG selected Boeing 
because it provided the highest degree of interoperability 
and the best capability, which was especially important as we 
transfer OPCON. He encouraged MND to negotiate directly with 
Boeing to reach an agreed price, reminding Yoon that the ROK 
had been warned the price would go up since Boeing's 
subcontractor prices had only been guaranteed until July 1. 
Unfortunately, the ROK had taken a very long time to reach 
its procurement decision. Keep negotiating, the Ambassador 
urged, adding that he very much wanted to see this project go 
through soon. 


SMA 
--- 
대사는 SMA 협상 문제를 제기했다. 미국 정부는 한국 측이 최소한 50%의 좀 더 동등한 부담을 하기를 원하고 있다며 이같이 말했다. 윤장관은 럼스펠드 장관이 과거에 자신에게 이 문제를 제기하는 데 있어서 “결코 실패한 적이 없다”고 응답했다. 그러면서 그는 그가 또 다시 SCM에서 그렇게 할 것이라고 전적으로 예상했다. 미국 국방장관이 그렇게 할 때마다, 그는 외교부에 그 같은 목소리를 전달했다고 윤장관은 말했다. 그는 또 만족할만한 합의가 이뤄질 수 있을 것이라고 자신했다. 그러나 “지난 번과 마찬가지” 올해 말 이후 어느 시점에나 가서야 합의가 이뤄질 것이라고 경고했다. 

¶8. (C) The Ambassador raised the SMA negotiation, stating 
that the USG was looking for a more equitable share from the 
ROK of at least 50%. Minister Yoon replied that Secretary 
Rumsfeld had "never failed" to raise the issue with him in 
the past and that he fully expected he would do so again at 
the SCM. Each time the Secretary of Defense did so he 
conveyed those views to MOFAT, Yoon said. He added that he 
was confident a satisfactory agreement could be reached, but 
warned it may not be accomplished until sometime after the 
end of the year, "like last time." 

JIKDO 
----- 
직도
직도 공대지 훈련장 상황에 대해 윤은 국방부가 “진전의 조치”를 취하고 있으며 개인적으로 군산시장과 이 문제를 논의하기 위해 2번 만남을 가졌다고 말했다. 한국정부는 곧 보상문제를 발표할 것으로 예상된다고 그는 조언했다. 그러면 군산 시민들은 9월 20일까지 합의를 하든지 말든지 할 것이다. 윤은 그가 할 수 있는 모든 일을 하겠다고 약속하며 “희망을 좀 더 것도 오케이”라는 개인적 평가를 덧붙였다. 

¶9. (C) On the status of the Jikdo air-to-surface training 
range, Yoon stated that MND had taken "steps of progress" and 
that he personally had met twice with the Mayor of Kunsan 
City to discuss the issue. The ROKG was expected to announce 
its compensation plans very soon, Yoon advised. The people 
of Kunsan would then have until September 20th to agree or 
not. Yoon promised to do everything in his power, adding his 
personal assessment that it was "O.K. to have our hopes up a 
little." 

UNIFIL and IRAQ 
--------------- 

레바논 유엔평화유지군과 이라크
레바논 평화유지군에 기여할 수 있는지에 대한 한국 정부의 계획을 좀 더 상세히 말해줄 수 있겠느냐는 질문에 윤은 반기문 외교부 장관이 전투병력(단순히 의료팀이 아니라)을 레바논에 보내길 원한다, 그러나 외교부는 해당 지역에 평가팀을 보낼 계획을 먼저 세우고 있다고 답변했다. 그 이후, 한국 정부는 “포괄적인 토론”을 할 것인데, 이 때 육상부대 파견 가능성이 포함될 것이다. 그는 이 문제의 주무 부처인 외교부에 추가 질문을 하도록 미뤘다. 
¶10. (C) Asked to elaborate on ROK plans to contribute to 
UNIFIL in Lebanon, Yoon replied that Foreign Minister Ban 
Ki-moon wanted to send combat troops (not merely a medical 
team) to Lebanon but that MOFAT first planned on sending an 
assessment team to the area. Thereafter, the South Korean 
government would have a "comprehensive discussion" that would 
include the possibility of dispatching ground forces. He 
deferred any further questions to MOFAT, the lead ministry 
for the issue. 

이라크 파견 군대의 주둔 연장 계획에 대한 질문을 받고, 윤 장관은 11월 중순까지 “함구령”을 내렸다며, 이 시기에 한국 정부가 이 문제를 해결할 것이라고 답변했다. 그는 미국 정부가 이 때까지는 공개적인 언급을 삼가해 주었으면 한다는 희망을 피력했다. “그래야 미국 한국 관계가 더 꼬이지 않을 수 있다”는 것이다. 한편 한국 구회의 국방위는 현재 상황을 평가하기 위해 이라크를 방문하고, 국가적 토론을 준비할 것이다. 대사는 미국에서도 진지한 토론이 진행되고 있다고 말했다. 그러나 이 시점에서 이라크 국민을 버리는 것은 무책임하다고 강조했다. 우리는 계속해 지켜줘야 한다고 대사는 말했다. 그는 한국의 계속된 헌신은 그 지역에서 우리의 노력의 성공에 매우 중요하다고 덧붙였다. 

¶11. (C) Asked about ROK plans to extend its troop commitment 
to Iraq, Minister Yoon replied that he has effectively issued 
a "gag order" until mid-November when he said the ROK 
government would address the issue. He said he hoped the USG 
would also refrain from public remarks until then, "so as not 
to further complicate U.S.-ROK relations." In the meantime, 
the Defense Committee of the ROK National Assembly would 
visit Iraq to assess the current situation and prepare for 
that national debate. The Ambassador noted there was also a 
serious debate underway in the United States, but stressed it 
would be irresponsible to abandon the Iraqi people at this 
time. We must persevere, the Ambassador said, adding that 
the ROK's continued commitment was very important to the 
success of our efforts there. 

U.S.-ROK SUMMIT 
---------------- 
미국 한국 정상회담
대사와 윤장관은 9월 14일 워싱턴에서 열리는 정상회담은 미국 한국 동맹의 계속된 힘을 보여줄 수 있는 기회라는 시각에 공감을 표했다. 동시에 세계 다른 지역에서 한국의 공헌과 미국 한국 관계에 있어 다른 긍정적인 발전들을 강조하기에 좋은 기회이다. 우리는 “약간 흔들리고 있지만”, 한국과 미국은 “결국 우리 양측이 가고 싶어하는 곳에 가게 될 것”이라고 윤의 대사에게 말했다. 그는 노무현 행정부가 여러 가지 어려운 주제를 다루기로 했으므로, 미래 미국과 한국의 지도자들은 “좀 더 매끄럽게 올라탈 수 있을 것”이라고 말했다. 노 정부가 달려든 껄끄러운 이슈들은 가령 FTA와 용산 기지 이전, 전작권 이양 같은 것들이다. 

¶12. (C) The Ambassador and Minister Yoon shared the view 
that the September 14 summit meeting in Washington was an 
opportunity to demonstrate the continued strength of the 
U.S.-ROK Alliance, while also highlighting other positive 
developments in U.S.-South Korean relations, as well as ROK 
contributions elsewhere in the world. Although we may "sway 
a little," the Republic of Korea and the United States would 
"eventually get to where we both want to go," Yoon commented 
to the Ambassador. He also predicted that since the Roh 
Administration had chosen to tackle so many difficult issues, 
such as FTA, Yongsan relocation and the transfer of OPCON, 
future U.S. and South Korean leaders would have a "smoother 
ride." VERSHBOW 