^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  07SEOUL382  |  2007-02-08 04:56  |  기밀  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV PARM KS KN }}  |
====== 제 목: 토머스 크리스텐슨 동아시아태평양 부차관보 중국 관련 협의 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 000382 
국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
 
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 02/08/2017 
태그: PREL(([External Political Relations])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)])) 
제 목: 토머스 크리스텐슨 동아시아태평양 부차관보 중국 관련 협의
참조: 04 SEOUL 3997 
분류자: 정치 공사 참사관 조셉 윤((POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun)).  근거 1.4 (b/d) 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2013/08/16 15:38//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점: 1월 26~27일 동아시아태평양 토머스 크리스텐슨 부차관보는 탈북 망명 신청자, 6자 회담, 그리고 중국에 대해 논의하기 위해 한국정부 당국자와 학계 인사들과 회동하였다. 토머스 부차관보는 탈북자가 미합중국에 정착하도록 한국정부의 협조 노력에 대해 미국정부의 감사를 표명하고, 6자 회담에서의 진전이 있으려면, 엄격한 한미 공조가 더더욱 중요하다고 한국정부 대화상대역에 말하였다. 외교통상부 당국자들은 중국이 탈북자 보호, 그리고 북한을 압박해 비핵화하는 등의 큰 역할을 해야만 한다고 말하였다. 한국정부 당국자와 학계 인사들은 갑작스러운 북한의 붕괴에 중국이 어떻게 대응할 수 있을지 추정하기도 하였다. //요점 끝.//

2. (기밀) 1월 26일, 27일 토머스 크리스텐슨 동아태 담당 부차관보는 외교통상부 조병제 북미국장(엄격히 보호요); 조용천 아시아·태평양국 심의관 (엄격히 보호요); 그리고 박윤준 정책기획협력관 (엄격히 보호요) 등을 개별적으로 회동하였다. 크리스텐슨은 세종연구소 수석연구원이며 현대중국학회 회장인 이태환 (엄격히 보호요), 외교부 산하 외교안보연구원 중국안보정책 김흥규 교수 (엄격히 보호요), 그리고 김태호 한림대 국제대학원대학교 현대 중국연구소 소장(엄격히 보호요) 등 중국 관련 전문가인 학계인사들과도 회동하였다.
===== 중국 소재 탈북자 =====

3. (기밀) 외교통상부 회동에서 크리스텐슨 부차관보는 탈북자의 미국 정착을 위한 노력에 한국정부가 협력해준 데 감사를 표명했고, 작년 미국 정착에 자격이 없다고 여겨진 탈북자를 한국정부가 수용해준 데 대해 고마움을 재차 언급하였다. 한국정부의 지원을 공개적으로 강조하지는 않겠지만, 한미협력의 강력한 사례이다. 미국정부는 유엔난민고등판무관과 중국과의 협력을 개선하는 게 결정적으로 중요함을 이해하고 있다. 우리의 대사관의 외교 임무는 탈북자 처리를 위해 고안되지 않았고, 탈북자 개개인이 한국 혹은 미국을 정착지로 추구하건 상관없이 한미 양국 정부는 유엔난민고등판무관의 참여가 필요하다. 미국정부는 중국정부가 탈북자에 대한 탄압을 중단하고, 유엔난민고등판무관이 자체 기능을 행사할 수 있도록 1951년 난민협약과 1967년 난민의정서하의 중국의 의무를 지켜줄 것을 계속 촉구할 예정이다. 미국정부는 탈북자 문제에 관한 더 많은 중국의 협력을 도모하는 합동 외교적 조치 가능성에 열린 자세이다.

4. (기밀) 조용천 아시아·태평양국 심의관은 한국정부는 중국에 있는 탈북자를 돕기가 어렵다는 데 생각을 같이 하였지만, 중국의 태도가 개선되었다고 말하였다. 1990년대 초 중국정부는 탈북자는 //“한중 간의 사안이 아니라.”//라며 한국과 탈북자에 대해 논의조차도 하지 않았다. 그러나 2000년을 시점으로 중국은 베이징 유엔난민고등판무관에 진입한 7명의 탈북자를 제삼국을 통해 //“출국”//하도록 허용하였다. 조용천은 한국정부는 유엔난민고등판무관이 중국에서 더 많은 일을 할 수 있길 바라고 있지만, 일부 중국 당국자들은 2008년 베이징 올림픽을 앞두고 안정 유지에 더 많은 걱정을 하는 것으로 보인다. 조용천은 한국정부도 북한을 탈출해 중국에 있는 남한 사람의 보호를 걱정하고 있다고 강조하였다. 한국전쟁 끝났을 당시 여전히 북한에 생존하는 걸로 생각되는 국군 포로 500명을 석방하지 못하였다. 1970년대와 1980년대 북한은 남한 고등학생 수백 명을 납치하고, 해상에서 한국 어부들을 납치하였다. 주기적으로 국군포로와 납북자, 혹은 그들의 친인척들은 도움을 받기 위해 중국 주재 한국대사관을 연락한다. 1990년대 초 탈북자 사건에 대한 대응과 다른 점은 중국이 탈출한 한국인들의 한국과의 특별한 관계를 대게 인정하고 중국을 떠나도록 허락하였다.

5. (기밀) 박윤준 정책기획협력관은 탈북자들이 범죄자나 테러리스트가 아닌 한 남한에 정착을 원하는 모든 탈북자를 수용하는 게 남한의 정책이라고 말하였다. 한국정부는 2006년에 2,000명이 넘는 탈북자를 정착시켰고, 2007년 4월께는 총 1만 명의 탈북자가 정착할 것으로 예상한다. 2006년 탈북자의 대부분은 태국에서(37퍼센트), 몽골에서(28퍼센트), 중국에서(20퍼센트), 그리고 캄보디아에서(11퍼센트) 등을 통해 한국에 정착하였다. 그러나 중국은 탈북자들이 한국정부 대사관을 떠나기까지 대기 시간을 늘리고 있으며, 탈북자와 그들을 돕는 활동가들에 대한 단속을 확대하고 있다. 당시 중국에 있던 송민순 외교부 장관은 중국 상대역과 북한 핵 문제에 집중하겠지만, 그는 탈북자에 대한 더 큰 협력도 모색할 계획도 하고 있다. 중국에 공동 외교 교섭을 요청하자, 박윤준은 동시 외교 교섭이 더 효과적일 거라고 말하였다. 한국정부는 조용한 외교를 선호하지만, 중국과 몽골 등지의 활동과 관련 유엔난민고등판무관과의 논의를 미국정부에 꾸준히 알리도록 할 의사가 있다.
===== 6자 회담 =====

6. (기밀) 크리스텐슨 부차관보는 북한의 김계관 외무부상과 함께한 힐 차관보의 베를린 논의, \\ 국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution)) \\ 그리고 서울 도쿄, 그리로 베이징에서 힐 차관보의 상대역과의 논의가 6자 회담의 생산적인 재계로 이어질 것으로 희망을 표명하였다. 북한이 일정부분 진전에 합의하게 된다면, 북한이 분명히 여타 5자 당사국 사이 이견을 찾으려고 할 때 강화된 한미 공조 유지는 더더욱 중요하게 될 것이다. 우리는 북한 측의 사소한 진전이 북한에 대한 모든 압력의 일소로 나타날 거라는 메시지를 보내지 않도록 해야만 한다.

7. (기밀) 조병제 북미국장은 동의하며, 송 장관과 라이스 국무장관의 1월 24일 전화통화에서 견해가 일치한다는 점을 확인하였다. 송민순은 6자 회담에서 진전이 있을 때에만 중단된 대북 인도적 원조를 재검토할 수 있다고 강조하였다. 조병제는 힐 차관보의 베를린 회담 이후, 천영우 한국정부 6자 회담 수석대표는 북한이 진전을 이룰 수 있는 이번 기회를 잡아야 할 필요가 있다고 베이징에서 김계관에게 말하였다. 조병제는 북한이 클린턴 정부 말 합의 도출의 기회를 놓친 것에서 교훈을 삼길 희망하였다. 한국정부는 북한에 대해 더욱 엄하게 대할 것을 중국에 역시 요청하였지만, 한국정부는 중국이 충분한 조치를 할지 의구심이 있다.
===== 북한 붕괴 가능성? =====

8. (기밀) 박윤준 정책기획협력관은 6자 회담 없이는 북한 경제가 악화할 거라고 평가하였다. 북한 경제는 주로 중국과 한국, 그리고 세계식량계획의 도움으로 2006년 1퍼센트 성장하였고, 2007년에는 그보다 성장률이 낮을 것이다. 북한의 연간 식량 수요는 6백만 톤이지만, 4백만 톤밖에 생산하지 못한다. 2006년 이전 한국과 세계식량계획은 한해 1백만 톤을 제공하였지만, 식량부족은 여전하다. 한국은 30만 톤의 비료를 보통 제공하였지만, 만일 북한이 모내기 철 이전에 비료를 수령하지 못한다면 생산량은 더욱 하락할 것이다; 북한은 한해 50만 톤의 비료밖에 생산하지 못한다. 그러나 북한 핵 문제가 해결되고 나면 한국은 개성공업지구를 확대할 계획을 재가동해서 더 많은 북한 주민을 고용하길 희망한다. 박윤준과 소속 직원들은 중국의 식량원조가 한국의 식량원조보다 다소 적은 것으로 추정한다. 박윤준과 소속 직원들은 중국은 연간 기준 50만 톤 정도의 유류를 제공하는 데, 이 원조는 대북 원조의 중요한 부분을 차지한다. (주석: 한림대학원대학교 김태호 교수는 중국의 식량수출이 2006년 50퍼센트 줄은 20만 톤으로 생각하였다. 그는 연간 대북 유류 지원으로 50만 톤을 전달하는 걸고 생각한다. 주석 끝.)

9. (기밀) 조용천 아시아·태평양국 심의관은 중국정부는 한국의 경제적 잠재성을 평가하는 가운데 북한을 계속 부담으로 본다고 단언하였다. 그러나 중국 당국자는 북한에 너무 압박을 가하면 역효과가 나고 아마도 정국이 불안 해진다고 주장한다. 만일 북한 붕괴하면 중국이 과도하게 개입하지 않을 거로 추정하였다. 그렇게 했다간 국제적인 반대에 봉착할 수 있다. 또 다른 제한 요소는 중국의 과도한 개입은 대만 문제의 국제적 개입에 대한 전례가 될 수 있다는 점이다. 북미1과 한 과장은 중국의 하나의 중국 정책은 중국이 한국 통일에 개입하지 못하게 만든다. 박윤준 정책기획협력관은 중국 국경에 위협만 없다면, 중국은 북한의 불안 탓에 중국 국경에 위협이 덜한 남한 주도의 통일을 환영할 수 있다는 장미빛 견해를 제공하였다. 그런 통일은 중국의 국방비를 감축하게 할 수 있다.

10. (기밀) 세종연구소 수석연구원이며 현대중국학회 회장인 이태환과 함께한 개별 회동에서, 이태환은 한국 통일에서 중국의 역할은 미중 관계에 달려 있다고 말하였다. 만일 미중 관계가 좋고, 미군이 군사분계선 남쪽에 남는다면, 그리고 갑작스러운 통일이 기정사실로 받아들여진다면, 이태환은 중국이 통일을 막지 않는다고 예상하였다. 중국과 한국은 서로 협력할 근거가 있는데, 그 이유는 양국이 북한 난민의 대량 유입에 대해 우려하기 때문이다. 국내 경제와 정치적 도전에 집중해야 하는 시기라는 게 중국으로선 가장 중요하다.

11. (기밀) 외교안보연구원 중국안보정책 김흥규 교수는 중국의 바라는 우선순위를 역내 안정, 김정일 정권의 생존, 그리고 북한의 비핵화 순으로 매겼다. 안정 욕구는 중국이 북한에 압박을 가해 핵 사업을 포기하도록 할 수 있는 모든 조치를 못 하게 만든다. 중국의 군사학계 김 교수 연락선은 중국군은 북한 붕괴 시 독자적으로 개입하지 않겠지만, 여타 국가들과 협력할 수는 있다고 주장하였다. 북한의 핵 실험 이후에 중국의 우선순위가 변경될 수 없었는지 묻자, 김흥규는 중국 지도자들은 북한에 대해 심기가 불편하며, 이는 중국 당국자로 하여금 //“피를 나눈 형제”//에서 //“보통”//의 유대관계로 북중관계를 하향 조종하게 할 수도 있다. 안정적 경제 개발에 대한 중국의 집중은 핵무기에 대한 우려를 여전히 능가한다.

12. (기밀) 한림대학원대학교의 김태호 한림대 국제대학원대학교 현대 중국연구소 소장은 중국의 핵심 관심사는 역내 안정에 뒤이어 북한 정권 유지, 비핵화 순이라는 데 견해를 같이하였다. 김태호는 중국이 북한 핵 문제를 해결하기보다는 관리하길 선호할 수 있다고 추정하였다. 이런 해결 방안은 중국의 6자 회담 주최에 비교해 중국의 국제적인 인지도를 낮출 수 있다.
===== 중국에 대한 견해 =====

13. (기밀) 조용천 아시아·태평양국 심의관은 중국은 한국정부의 중요한 경제 상대국이라고 규정하였다. 그러나 중국은 역사적으로 역내 지배적 열강이었고, 그 점이 한중 관계를 복잡하게 만든다. 한국정부는 미국과 강력한 동맹을 유지하길 원하지만, 중국과의 관계 개선도 도모하고 있다. 중국의 투명성 결여는 예측 불가능성의 수준에 더해지면서 불안을 조성한다. 한국정부는 한국의 고대 고구려 왕조를 중국의 지방 정부라고 (참조 전문) 주장하는 2004년 중국의 //“동북공정”//에 대해 회의적이다. 비록 중국 당국자들은 동북공정 작업을 //“단지 하나의 연구”//일 뿐이라고 말하지만, 남한 국민은 중국정부가 중심적인 역사적 연계성을 만들려는 시도라고 생각한다. 아마도 중국은 미래의 한국통일 이후에 영토 분쟁에 대해 우려하면서 중국 북동 지역의 200백만 조선족에 대한 편입을 강화하길 희망하는 모습이다.

14. (기밀) 박윤준 정책기획협력관은 //“중국의 부상”//은 하나의 위협으로 보기보다는 하나의 기회로 봐야만 한다고 피력하였다. 냉전이 끝났고, 한국은 대 중국 무역 수지 흑자를 보이는 몇 안되는 선진 경제로 한국 경제는 긴밀한 유대관계로 수혜를 입고 있다. 한중 무역은 미화 천억 달러 정도지만, 한국정부는 2012년경에는 그 두 배로 예상한다. 중국은 또한 북한 핵 문제에서 핵심적인 역할이 있다. 중국은 1인당 소득이 낮은 거대 국가이기에 중국정부는 북동아시아의 안정에 집중한다. 중국은 아마도 미국·소련 대결에서 교훈을 얻었고, 그래서 세계 속에서 미합중국과 경쟁할 수 없음을 아마도 알고 있다. 전 세계 빈곤의 3분의 2는 중국과 인도에서 기인한다. 그래서 중국 지도자는 경제 개발에 집중하기 위한 안정이 필요하다. 비록 중국은 투명성이 없어서 이웃 국가들을 안심하게 할 수 없지만, 중국의 지도부는 안정적이라고 박윤준을 견해를 피력하였다. 중국은 1997년 남한이 경험한 것과 같이 어느 시점에 금융 위기가 있을 수 있지만, 박윤준은 중국정부가 그것 역시도 극복할 것으로 예상하였다. 아마도 다룰 수 없을 정도로 너무 빨라지는 정치 경제적 자유화가 중국이 피하길 원하는 한 가지이다.

15. (기밀) 크리스텐슨은 역사적인 관점에서 중국은 과거와 비교하면 국제적인 문제에서 더욱 건설적인 역할을 수행하고 있다고 말하였다. 몇 년 전만 하더라도 북한과 이란 혹은 수단 문제에 관한 국제 사회와 함께하는 중국의 협력을 그다지 기대하지 않았다. 그러나 중국정부는 과거의 경우보다 한층 도움이 되고 있고, 중국의 일반적인 추세를 반기고 있다. 북한만 하더라도 중국은 유엔안보리 결의안 1695호, 1718호를 지지하였고 지속적으로 6자 회담을 주재하고 있다. 수단 문제에 대해선 중국의 왕광야 유엔 상임이사국 대표는 유엔과 아프리카연합 혼성 평화유지군을 수용하도록 수단 정부에 촉구하였다. 심지어 버마 문제도 중국정부가 비록 유엔결의안에 거부권을 행사했지만, 버마가 국제적인 문제라고 지적한 중국의 성명은 국제 문제에 대한 중국의 비간섭 기조보다는 나아졌다. 중국은 버마나 수단과 같은 문제에서 미국이 바라는 정도에 근접하지는 못했지만 만일 한 컷이 아닌 동영상으로 중국의 정책을 바라보면 긍정적인 궤적을 그리고 있다. 미국정부는 아시아에서의 입지 강화를 유지할 필요가 있고 중국과의 강력한 교섭이 필요하다. 이런 내용은 서로 모순되지 않는다. 아시아에서의 미국의 강력한 입지와 중국과의 관계 강화 모두 중국정부에는 적절한 전략을 선택하도록 장려책을 제공한다. 미국의 힘은 중국이 역내 국가를 괴롭힐 생각을 못하게 권고하고, 미국의 역내 관여는 중국정부가 미국정부와의 협력을 통해 취할 혜택을 실증해 보여준다.

16. (미분류) 이 전문은 크리스텐슨 부차관보가 승인하였다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/5/07seoul382|프와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07SEOUL382.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/08/2017 
TAGS: PREL [External Political Relations], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], MNUC [Military Nuclear Applications], PREF [Refugees], KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)], CH [China (Mainland)] 
SUBJECT: EAP DAS CHRISTENSEN'S CONSULTATIONS ON CHINA 
 
REF: 04 SEOUL 3997 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: EAP Deputy Assistant Secretary Thomas 
Christensen met with ROKG officials and academics January 
26-27 to discuss North Korean asylum seekers, Six Party Talks 
(6PT), and China.  The DAS told his ROKG interlocutors that 
the USG appreciated Seoul's cooperation with efforts to 
resettle North Korean refugees to the United States and that 
should progress be made at the 6PT, tight U.S.-ROK 
coordination would be even more important.  MOFAT officials 
said China should play a greater role in protecting North 
Korean refugees and in pressing the DPRK to denuclearize. 
ROKG officials and academics also speculated about how China 
might respond to a sudden collapse of North Korea.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C) EAP Deputy Assistant Secretary Thomas J. Christensen 
held consultations on January 26 and 27, meeting separately 
with Cho Byung-jae, Director-General of the North American 
Affairs Bureau in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
(MOFAT) (strictly protect); Cho Yong-chun, Deputy 
Director-General of the Asian and Pacific Affairs Bureau 
(strictly protect); and Park Yoon-june, Senior Coordinator 
for Policy Planning in the Policy Planning Bureau (strictly 
protect).  Christensen also met with ROK academics 
specializing on China, including Lee Tai-hwan, Senior 
Research Fellow at the Sejong Institute and Chairman of the 
China Study Committee (strictly protect), Kim Heung-kyu, 
Professor of Chinese Security Policy at MOFAT's Institute of 
Foreign Affairs and National Security (strictly protect), and 
Kim Tae-ho, Director of the Center for Contemporary Chinese 
Studies at the Hallym Institute of Advanced International 
Studies (strictly protect). 
 
---------------- 
KOREANS IN CHINA 
---------------- 
 
¶3. (C) In meetings at MOFAT, DAS Christensen expressed 
appreciation for ROKG cooperation with efforts to resettle 
North Korean refugees to the United States and reiterated 
gratitude for Seoul's acceptance last year of a North Korean 
deemed ineligible for USG resettlement.  While we would not 
publicly emphasize ROKG assistance, it was a strong example 
of cooperation.  The USG also understood the critical 
importance of improving PRC cooperation with UNHCR.  Our 
diplomatic missions were not designed for processing 
refugees, and Washington and Seoul needed UNHCR involvement, 
regardless of whether individuals sought ROKG or USG 
resettlement.  Washington would continue to urge Beijing to 
adhere to its obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention 
and its 1967 Protocol, to cease the refouling of North Korean 
refugees, and to allow UNHCR to exercises its functions.  The 
USG was open to the possibility of jointly demarching the PRC 
to seek greater cooperation on this issue. 
 
¶4.  (C) Asian and Pacific Affairs Bureau Deputy 
Director-General Cho Yung-chun said that the ROKG shared 
difficulties in helping North Koreans in China, but the PRC's 
attitude had improved.  In the early 1990s, Beijing would not 
even discuss North Koreans with the ROK saying that it was 
"not a matter of PRC-ROK" concern.  Starting in 2000, 
however, China allowed seven North Koreans who entered the 
UNHCR office in Beijing to go "abroad," via a third country, 
to South Korea.  Cho said Seoul hoped UNHCR could do more in 
China, but some PRC authorities seemed more concerned about 
maintaining stability, especially ahead of the 2008 Olympics, 
than protecting North Koreans.  Cho emphasized that Seoul was 
also concerned about protecting South Koreans in China who 
had escaped from the DPRK.  At the end of the Korean War, the 
DPRK failed to release 500 South Koreans prisoners-of-war who 
still were thought to be alive in the DPRK.  In the 1970s and 
1980s, the DPRK kidnapped hundreds of South Korean high 
school children in the South and ROK fishermen at sea. 
Periodically, POWs, abductees, or their relatives would 
contact ROK missions in China for assistance.  Unlike their 
responses to North Korean cases in the early 1990s, the PRC 
generally recognized their special connection to the ROK and 
allowed them to leave China. 
 
¶5.  (C) Senior Coordinator for Policy Planning Park Yoon-june 
said that Seoul's policy was to receive all North Koreans who 
wanted to resettle in South Korea, unless they were criminals 
or terrorists.  The ROKG resettled over 2,000 North Koreans 
in 2006, and by April 2007 expected to have resettled a total 
of 10,000 North Koreans.  Most of the North Koreans in 2006 
came from Thailand (37 percent), Mongolia (28 percent), China 
(20 percent), and Cambodia (11 percent).  The PRC, however, 
was lengthening waiting times for North Koreans to leave ROKG 
missions (now around 18 months) and increasing crackdowns on 
North Koreans and activists assisting them.  Foreign Minister 
Song Min-soon, who was in China at the time, would focus on 
the DPRK nuclear issue with his PRC interlocutors, but he 
also planned to seek greater cooperation on North Korean 
refugees.  Asked about jointly demarching the PRC, Park said 
parallel demarches would be more effective than joint 
demarches.  The ROKG preferred quiet diplomacy but was 
willing to keep the USG informed of its discussions with 
UNHCR regarding operations in China and Mongolia. 
 
--------------- 
SIX PARTY TALKS 
--------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) DAS Christensen expressed hope that Assistant 
Secretary Hill's discussions in Berlin with DPRK Vice Foreign 
 
SIPDIS 
Minister Kim Kye-gwan (KKG) and in Seoul, Tokyo, and Beijing 
with his counterparts would lead to a productive resumption 
of Six Party Talks (6PT).  Should the DPRK agree to some 
progress, however, tight Washington-Seoul coordination would 
be even more important to maintain as the DPRK would surely 
try to find differences among the other five parties.  We 
should ensure that we do not send the message to the DPRK 
that minor progress on Pyongyang's part might lead to the 
elimination of all pressure on the DPRK. 
 
¶7.  (C) North American Affairs Bureau Director-General Cho 
Byung-jae agreed and noted that Minister Song and Secretary 
Rice in a January 24 phone call had affirmed that they were 
on the same page.  Song emphasized that Seoul could review 
its suspension of humanitarian aid to North Korea only when 
there was progress at the 6PT.  Cho also said that following 
the A/S Hill's Berlin talks, ROKG 6PT lead negotiator Chun 
Yung-woo had told KKG in Beijing that the DPRK needed to 
seize this chance to make progress.  Cho hoped the DPRK had 
learned from its lost opportunity to reach an accord at the 
end of the Clinton Administration.  The ROKG had also asked 
the PRC to get tougher with the DPRK, but Seoul doubted 
Beijing was doing enough. 
 
------------------------ 
POTENTIAL DPRK COLLAPSE? 
------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (C) Park assessed that the DPRK economy would worsen 
without 6PT progress.  The DPRK economy grew by one percent 
in 2006, mainly from PRC, ROK, and WFP aid, and the economy 
would grow even less in 2007.  The DPRK's annual demand for 
food was 6 million metric tons, but it only produced 4 
million metric tons.  Before 2006, the ROK and the World Food 
Program had generally given about one million metric tons a 
year, but scarcity still existed.  The ROK also usually gave 
300,000 tons of fertilizer, but if the DPRK did not receive 
fertilizer before the planting season, production yields 
would fall further; the DPRK only produced about 50,000 tons 
of fertilizer a year.  Once the DPRK nuclear issue was 
resolved, however, the ROK hoped to resume plans for the 
expansion of the Kaesong Industrial Complex and employ 
greater numbers of North Koreans.  Park and his staff 
speculated that PRC food assistance was generally less than 
the ROK's food aid.  Park's staff thought the PRC gave around 
500,000 tons of oil on an annual basis and that this 
constituted a significant amount of assistance to the DPRK. 
(NOTE: Kim Tae-ho at the Hallym Institute of Advanced 
International Studies thought that PRC exports of food 
dropped 50 percent in 2006 to 200,000 metric tons.  He 
thought the PRC delivered 500,000 tons of oil annually to the 
DPRK.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶9.  (C) Asia Bureau DDG Cho asserted that Beijing had come to 
value the ROK's economic potential while the DPRK was 
increasingly a burden.  PRC officials, however, claimed that 
too much pressure on the DPRK would be counterproductive and 
perhaps destabilizing.  Should the DPRK collapse, Cho 
speculated that China would not intervene too much.  If it 
did it might face international opposition.  Another limiting 
factor was that too much PRC intervention could become a 
precedent for international intervention in the Taiwan issue. 
 North American Affairs Division I Director Hahn agreed that 
the PRC's one-China policy might prevent it from interfering 
in Korean unification.  Park offered an even rosier view that 
without the threat on its border, China might welcome a 
Seoul-based unification as less threatening that the threat 
of DPRK instability on its border, such a unification might 
lead China to reduce its military spending. 
 
¶10.  (C) In separate meetings with academics, Lee Tai-hwan, 
Senior Research Fellow at the Sejong Institute and Chairman 
of the China Study Committee, said that a PRC role in Korean 
unification would depend on U.S.-PRC relations.  If bilateral 
relations were good, if U.S. troops remained south of the 
Demilitarized Zone, and if a sudden unification were seen as 
a fait accompli, Lee did not expect China to prevent 
unification.  The PRC and ROK would have reasons to cooperate 
with each other because both had concerns about being flooded 
with DPRK refugees.  The most important thing for China was 
time to concentrate on domestic economic and political 
challenges. 
 
¶11.  (C) Kim Heung-kyu, Professor of Chinese Security Policy 
at MOFAT's Institute of Foreign Affairs and National Security 
(IFANS), ranked China's preferences as regional stability, 
survival of Kim Jong-il's regime, and DPRK denuclearization. 
The desire for stability prevented the PRC from doing all it 
could to press the DPRK to abandon its nuclear programs.  His 
contacts at the Academy of Military Sciences in China claimed 
that the PRC military would not intervene alone in a DPRK 
collapse, but it could work with other countries.  Asked 
whether PRC preferences might have changed after the DPRK 
nuclear test, Kim said that PRC leaders were upset with the 
DPRK and this might lead the next generation of Chinese 
officials to downgrade their relationship with the DPRK to 
"regular" rather than "blood-brother" ties.  The PRC's focus 
on stability for economic development would still trump 
concerns over nuclear weapons. 
 
¶12.  (C) Kim Tae-ho, Director of the Center for Contemporary 
Chinese Studies at the Hallym Institute of Advanced 
International Studies, agreed that China's core concern was 
regional stability, followed by maintaining the DPRK regime, 
and denuclearization.  Kim speculated that the PRC might 
prefer to manage rather than resolve the DPRK nuclear issue. 
A resolution might lower China's international profile 
compared to its hosting of the 6PT. 
 
-------------- 
VIEWS OF CHINA 
-------------- 
 
¶13.  (C) Asia Bureau DDG Cho characterized the PRC as an 
important economic partner for the ROKG.  China historically, 
however, was also a dominant regional power, which 
complicated the relationship.  The ROKG wanted to retain a 
strong U.S. alliance but also promote improved relations with 
China.  China's lack of transparency contributed to a level 
of unpredictability that was unsettling.  The ROKG was 
skeptical about PRC "academic studies" in 2004 that asserted 
that the ancient Korean kingdom of Goguryeo was a Chinese 
provincial government (reftel).  Although PRC officials said 
the works were "just a study," the South Koreans thought 
Beijing might be trying to create a central historical link. 
Perhaps the PRC was concerned about territorial disputes 
following a future Korean unification and hoped to 
consolidate incorporation of the two million ethnic Koreans 
in China's northeast region. 
 
¶14.  (C) Park opined that the "rise of China" should be 
viewed more as an opportunity than as a threat.  The Cold War 
ended and the ROK was one of few advanced economies that had 
a trade surplus with China, so the ROK economy would benefit 
from closer ties.  ROK-PRC trade was around USD 100 billion, 
but by 2012 the ROKG expected that to double.  The PRC also 
had a key role in the DPRK nuclear issue.  China was a big 
country with a low per capita income, so Beijing was focused 
on stability in Northeast Asia.  The PRC probably had also 
learned from the U.S.-USSR confrontation, so it probably knew 
it could not compete with the United States around the world. 
 Two-thirds of the world's poverty came from China and India, 
so PRC leaders needed stability to focus on economic 
development.  Although China lacked the transparency that 
could reassure its neighbors, Park opined that its leadership 
was stable.  China might have a financial crisis at some 
point, like South Korea experienced in 1997, but Park 
expected that Beijing would recover from that as well.  The 
one thing that Beijing probably hoped to avoid was  economic 
or political liberalization that was too fast to handle. 
 
¶15.  (C) Christensen said that from a historical perspective 
the PRC was playing a more constructive role in international 
issues than in the past.  Years ago he would not have 
expected much PRC cooperation with the international 
community on North Korea, Iran, or Darfur.  But, Beijing was 
being more helpful than it had been in the past and the USG 
was pleased by the general trend lines.  On North Korea, the 
PRC had supported UNSCR 1695 and 1718 and continued to host 
the 6PT.  On Darfur, UN Permanent Representative Wang Guangya 
had urged Khartoum to accept a hybrid UN-African Union 
peacekeeping force.  Even on Burma, although the PRC vetoed a 
UN resolution, the PRC statement that noted that Burma had 
internal problems was better than China's general line about 
non-interference in internal issues.  China was not near 
where the USG wanted it to be on issues like Darfur and 
Burma, but if you looked at China's policy as a motion 
picture rather than a snapshot Beijing was on a positive 
trajectory.  The USG needed to retain a strong presence in 
Asia and it needed strong engagement with China.  These 
things were not contradictory.  Both gave Beijing incentives 
to choose a proper strategy.  U.S. strength would encourage 
China not to think it could bully the region, and U.S. 
engagement demonstrated the benefits Beijing could gain from 
cooperation with the USG. 
 
¶16.  (U) This cable was cleared by DAS Christensen. 
VERSHBOW
</file>