====== 통일부 장관, 북한이 자립 경제를 추구한다고 밝혀 ======


SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/16/2017 
TAGS: KN KS ECON PGOV
SUBJECT: NORTH KOREANS ARE FENDING FOR THEMSELVES 
ECONOMICALLY, SAYS ROK UNIFICATION MINISTRY 
 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
===== 요약 =====


 

¶1. (C) 통일부는 현재 북한 내 경제 활동의 대부분은 비공식적이며,  공식 부문의 경제와 산업 기반은 1990년

대 이래 심각하게 약화되어 왔다고 추정한다. 그 결과로, 북한 주민들은 수입의 대부분을 비공식 부문에서 얻

으며, 공식 부문에서 얻는 수입은 얼마 되지 않는다. 또한, 통일부는 북한의 해외 의존도가 매우 높음을 언급

했다. 1960년대와 1970년대에는 해외 원조가 대부분 중공업에 투자되었으나, 현재는 농업과 경공업 등에 쓰

이고 있다. 북한 정부는 사실상 중공업을 다시 부양하는 것을 포기한 것으로 보인다. 요약 끝.

제조업의 붕괴

¶2.  (C) 8월 27일 미국, 일본, 호주의 외교관들이 북한의 경제상황에 관해 나눈 비공식적 담화에서, 평양과 다

른 도시들을 정기적으로 방문하는 박광호 통일부 과장 (이하 Park) 과 정보분석실의 김종로 (이하 Kim) 는 북

한의 공식 부문 경제와 산업 기반이 심각히 약화되어 있으며, 다시 회복될 가능성은 낮다고 평가했다. Park은 

북한의 제조업 부문은 1960년대와 70년대 소련이 공급한 산업 물자를 바탕으로 급속한 성장을 이루었다고 설

명했다. 북한의 주체사상에는 반하는 일이지만, 북한의 공장을 계속 가동시킨 원동력은 소련이 지원하는 기술

과 부품들이었다. 그러나 소련이 붕괴한 후 북한의 공장과 인프라는 꾸준히 위축되어 왔다. 1990년대 초, 러시

아 정부가 기술과 부품의 무상 지원을 거부하고 돈을 요구하자 북한은 얼마 되지 않는 자국의 경화 (hard 

currency)를 부품과 서비스에 사용할 수는 없다고 판단, 서서히 공장 가동을 중단했다. 북한에 대한 무역 제제 

또한 북한이 다른 기술에 접근하는 것을 더욱 제한했다.

¶3.  (C) Park은 북한이 산업 생산력을 사실상 상실하자 "산업의 회복이 절실"했음에도 불구하고 중공업 부문

을 포기했다고 설명했다. 광물과 같은 주요 물품의 거래는 계속되었으나, 그 수익은 산업으로 다시 투자되지 

않았다. 그 결과는 높아진 해외 의존도와 중국 등 타국과의 늘어난 교역량이었다. (박광호와 김종로는 중국이 

최근 북한에 투자했음을 인정했으나, 중국의 영향력에 대한 안건은 따로 논의할 것을 요청했다.) 북한의 산업

이 기울었음을 강조하며, Park은 1960-80년대 북한의 산업은 해외 의존도가 높았으나, 식량 자급률은 높았던 

것으로 보였다고 말했다. 그러나 지금 북한은 제조업이 무너졌을 뿐만 아니라, 식량 또한 다른 나라에게 손을 

벌리고 있다. 

===== 예시 =====



¶4.  (C) Park은 북한의 부족한 전력량은 전체적인 산업 생산력의 감소와 북한 산업이 직면한 문제점을 동시에 

보여주는 예라고 설명했다. 북한이 생산 가능한 전력량은 7500MW이나, 통일부는 실제 생산량은 그의 3분의 

1정도밖에 되지 않을 것으로 짐작하고 있다. (주: 2002년 Nautilus Institutie의 보고서도 비슷한 예측을 한 바 

있다. 10,000-12,000 MW정도의 전력을 생산 가능하지만, 실제로는 2,000-3,000 MW정도를 생산. 주석 끝.) 일

례로, 북한의 기술자들은 그에게 터빈 날개 4개 중 하나가 부러져 사용할 수 없게 된 수력발전소가 있다는 이

야기를 해 주었다고 한다. 날을 교체하거나 터빈 전체를 교체하는 대신, 기술자들은 다른 쪽의 날을 부러뜨려 

훨씬 적은 용량으로 터빈을 돌리는 임시방편을 취했다. 이렇게 임시방편으로 시설을 수리하는 일은 북한에서

는 매우 흔했다. 남한과 6자회담 관련국들이 현재 북한에 발전소를 가동하기 위한 연료를 보내 주려고 하지만

, 연료 뿐만 아니라 발전소 시설의 정비 또한 필요한 것으로 보인다. 

¶5.  (C) Park은 2003년 통일부 프로젝트의 일환으로 북한의 주요 산업도시인 흥남에 9일 동안 머무른 적이 

있었다고 한다. 그는 매일 흥남의 주요 철강 시설들 앞을 지나갔는데, 그는 그 시설에서 연기도, 원자재의 출

입도 보지 못했으며, 전체 시설이 가동을 멈추고 있었던 것으로 확신했다. 

¶6.  (C) 남한은 2007년 8000만 달러의 원자재를 북한에 공급해 북한이 신발, 옷, 그리고 다른 생필품들을 생

산할 수 있게 한 대신 북한의 광물 채굴권을 받았다. Kim은 당시 통일부가 북한의 공장을 조사했을 때 공장의 

시설이 심하게 낙후된 것을 보고 차라리 신발과 옷 등을 완제품으로 공급하는 것이 낫겠다고 제안했으나, 북

한은 끝까지 원자재를 받겠다고 고집했다고 말했다. 

비공식 시장이 사실상 경제다.

¶7. (C) Park은 북한이 공식 경제가 약회됨에 따라 공식 시장과 비공식 시장이 양립하는 극단적 형태의 경제형

태를 취하게 됬다고 말했다. 북한 주민들의 중앙 정부에 대한 의존도는 2002년 부분적 경제 자유화 등으로 인

해 감소한 상태이다. 통일부는 북한 노동자의 평균 임금은 한 달에 약 2500 원 (KPW) 정도 (3000 KPW/USD의 

비공식 환율로 계산하면 1달러보다 적은 임금이다) 이지만, 실제 필요한 생활비는 150,000 - 200,000 원 

(KPW) 정도라고 탈북자들은 말한다. 달리 말하자면, 공식적으로 받는 임금은 실제 수입의 일부일 뿐이라고 할 

수 있다. 탈북자들은 추가 소득은 주로 교역이나 밀거래, 추가 노동으로 번다고 말했다. Kim은 통일부가 추정

하기로는 북한 주민의 50%는 아직 공식적인 일자리에도 나가는 것으로 보인다고 한다. (주: 대한민국의 전문

가들은 많은 북한 노동자들이 공장주에게 자신이 출근한 것으로 위장하고 다른 일을 하기 위해 뇌물을 건내

는 경우도 있다고 말한다. 주석 끝.)

¶8. (C) 통일부는 또한 북한에서 "가진 자"와 "없는 자"간의 격차가 점점 커지고 있다고 분석한다. 예로, 배급제

도는 평양 시민들에게 쌀을 1kg당 45원 (KPW)에 살 수 있도록 하고 있지만, 배급제도가 유명무실해진 시골에

서는 주민들이 쌀을 사기 위해 평균 700~2000원 (KPW)까지 지불한다. (주: 대한민국의 NGO "좋은 친구들"은 

8월 28일 북한의 홍수로 인해 쌀의 시장가격이 kg당 3000원 (KPW)까지 올랐다고 발표함. 주석 끝.) 이와 같은 

가격차가 불만을 가져올 수 있으므로, 공무원들이 시장에서의 쌀의 공급과 가격을 통제할 것으로 보인다.

¶9.  (C) Kim과 Park은 일부 북한 주민들은 상대적으로 부유해 보인다고 전했다. Park은 최근 평양을 방문했을 

때 많은 북한 주민들이 고려호텔 (주로 외국인들에게만 식사를 제공함) 에서 값비싼 음식을 먹는 것을 보았으

며, 몇몇 가족들은 고급 사우나를 즐기고 있었다고 한다. 그들 중 몇 명은 자신을 중국과 거래하는 사업가라고 

소개했으며, 다른 이들은 공기업의 대표들이라고 했다. Park은 비공식적이긴 하지만 북한의 경제 활동이 전반

적으로 증가했다는 인상을 받았다. 하지만 경제 활동의 증가가 생산량의 증가를 의미하는 것은 아니었다. 공

장들은 여전히 전혀 움직이지 않았다. 


===== 평가:  장기적 계획의 부재 =====




¶10.  (C) Park과 Kim은 외교관들과 과연 북한 고위층이 공식부문이 무너지고, 외국의 원조에 의존하며, 비공

식 시장이 발전하고, 양극화가 심해지고 있는 현재 북한의 경제상황을 어떻게 보고있을 지를 논의했다. 외교

관들은 북한 정부가 공식 부문을 되살리기 위한 장기적 계획을 가지고 있지 않은 것으로 보인다고 평가했다. 

북한의 전략은 크게 두 부분으로 나뉘어져 있는 것으로 보인다: 정부는 일본 정부의 배상금과 같은 큰 수입을 

얻어내기를 기다리며 외부 원조와 불법행위에서 수입을 얻고, 개인들은 극단적 형태의 자유경제에 의존하는 

것이다.

VERSHBOW

===== 원문 =====



C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 002611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/16/2017 
TAGS: KN KS ECON PGOV
SUBJECT: NORTH KOREANS ARE FENDING FOR THEMSELVES 
ECONOMICALLY, SAYS ROK UNIFICATION MINISTRY 
 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
SUMMARY 

¶1.  (C) ROK Ministry of Unification (MOU) officials estimate 
that most of the DPRK's current economic activity is 
informal, while its formal economy and industrial base has 
severely eroded since the 1990s.  As a result, the average 
household in North Korea earns the bulk of its income through 
the informal sector, and a small fraction of its income from 
the formal sector.  MOU also notes North Korea's heavy 
dependend on foreign assistance.  In the 1960s and 1970s, 
this aid was devoted mostly to heavy industry, but is now 
slated for agriculture and light industry.  The DPRK 
government has effectively given up on resurrecting its heavy 
industrial sector.  End Summary. 
 

MANUFACTURING SECTOR CORRODED 

 
¶2.  (C)  During August 27 informal discussions with U.S., 
Japanese and Australian emboffs about economic conditions in 
North Korea, MOU Director for Inter-Korean Social Exchanges 
Park Kwang-ho, a regular visitor to Pyongyang and other North 
Korean cities, and Kim Jong-ro, of the Intelligence and 
Analysis Bureau, assessed the DPRK's official economy and 
industrial base as severely eroded, with little prospect of 
recovery.  Park said that the DPRK's manufacturing sector 
boomed in the 1960s and 1970s based on the industrial base 
that the Soviet Union supplied, in accordance with the DPRK's 
1954-1956 three-year plan.  Soviet assistance, expertise and 
parts subsequently kept factories running, belying North 
Korea's official self-reliance ("Juche") ideology.  But 
factories and infrastructure have been in steady decline 
since the Soviet Union collapsed.  Since the early 1990s, 
when the Russian Federation started demanding cash for parts 
and stopped sending free technical assistance, the DPRK has 
not chosen to use its scarce hard currency to purchase the 
parts and services needed to keep factories operating, and 
they have largely ground to a halt.  International export 
controls further limited the DPRK's access to technology. 
 
¶3.  (C) As a result of the breakdown of its industrial 
capacity, Park said, the DPRK "gave up" on heavy industry 
during the 1990s, even though they "desperately need an 
industrial revival."  Trade in primary products such as 
minerals continued, but the proceeds had not been invested 
back into industry.  The result was increased dependence on 
aid as well as increased trade, mostly with China.  (Park and 
Kim acknowledged that China had recently invested in the 
DPRK, but requested that Chinese influence be subject of 
another discussion).  Emphasizing what he saw as the decline 
in the DPRK's economic situation, Park observed that in the 
1960s-80s, the DPRK was dependent on foreign assistance to 
keep its industries running, but was self-sufficient in food. 
  Now, not only had the manufacturing sector collapsed, but 
the DPRK needed food aid also. 
 
Examples 
 
¶4.  (C) The spotty supply of electricity in the DPRK is both 
an example of the overall decline in industrial production 
and a factor compounding the difficulties facing industries, 
Park said.  The DPRK's electrical generating capacity is 
7,500 MW, but actual output is only one third of that, MOU 
estimates.  (Note:  A 2002 Nautilus Institute paper provides 
similar estimates:  10,000-12,000 MW capacity, and 
2,000-3,000 MW production.  End Note.) As an example of the 
deteriorated electrical system, North Korean engineers had 
told him about a hydroelectric turbine where one of four 
large propeller-like blades had broken, leaving the turbine 
unbalanced and inoperable.  Instead of replacing the blade or 
the entire turbine, the engineers broke off the matching 
blade on the other side of the shaft, allowing the turbine to 
spin but at reduced capacity.  Such coping mechanisms were 
common.  The ROKG and other Six-Party government were now 
beginning to supply heavy fuel oil to run DPRK power plants, 
but repair of the power distribution grid would also be 
needed, Kim noted. 
 
¶5.  (C) Park said that in connection with an MOU project in 
2003, he spent nine days in Hungnam, a main industrial city 
 
on the DPRK's east coast.  Each day, he had occasion to pass 
the city's main steel manufacturing area, and he left 
convinced that no manufacturing was going on, seeing no smoke 
from smokestacks (he illustrated this with a photograph) or 
signs of material going in and out of the huge facility. 
 
¶6.  (C) Kim noted the ROK's 2007 agreement to supply USD 80 
million worth of light industrial materials that DPRK 
factories were to use to produce shoes, clothing and other 
necessities, in exchange for the DPRK allowing ROK companies 
to mine minerals in the North.  He said that MOU surveys of 
DPRK factories, including several on-site visits, had led the 
ROKG to conclude that it would make more sense to supply the 
shoes, clothing and other items directly, since DPRK 
manufacturing capacity was so poor, but the DPRK had insisted 
on receiving the inputs instead. 
 

THE INFORMAL MARKET IS THE ECONOMY 

 
¶7. (C)  Park said that the erosion of the DPRK economy's 
formal sector had led to a "change in mindset" as the extreme 
version of the dual economy (formal and informal), common to 
developing countries, took hold in North Korea.  North 
Koreans had become less dependent on the central government 
for either employment or daily necessities, in part because 
of partial economic liberalization that the DPRK government 
introduced in 2002.  MOU estimated that the average income of 
a North Korean laborer was 2,500 North Korean won (KPW) per 
month (equivalent to less than 1 USD at the unofficial 
exchange rate of 3,000 KPW/USD), whereas actual household 
expenditures, according to recent defectors, were 150,000 - 
200,000 KPW per month.  In other words, official wages 
amounted to a small percentage of actual income.  Defectors 
had said that additional earnings came from trading, 
smuggling near the border, or extra work.  Kim said MOU 
estimated that only 50 percent of North Koreans were still 
going to their official places of employment.  (Note:  ROK 
academics have said that many workers pay their factory 
managers bribes to list them as present, while they spend the 
day on other pursuits.  End note.) 
 
¶8. (C) MOU also saw emerging differences between the "haves" 
and "have nots" in North Korea.  For example, the public 
distribution system allowed Pyongyang residents to buy rice 
at 45 KPW per kilogram, but in the countryside, where the 
public distribution system was no longer functioning, North 
Koreans had to pay 700-2,000 KPW per kilogram.  (Note:  ROK 
NGO Good Friends reported on August 28 that the market price 
for rice was around 3,000 KPW per kilogram because of recent 
floods.  End Note.)  The price discrepancy could breed 
resentment, and likely resulted in officials in control of 
the official rice supply selling it into the open market. 
 
¶9.  (C) Some North Koreans appeared relatively well off 
lately, Kim and Park noted.  Park had seen many North Koreans 
eating "expensive" meals at the Koryo hotel (which usually 
caters only to foreigners) on a recent visit to Pyongyang, 
and had also seen several North Korean families in the 
hotel's pricey sauna.  Some identified themselves as doing 
business with China; others claimed to represent DPRK 
state-owned companies.  His overall sense was that economic 
activity, most of it informal, had increased lately, but that 
did not mean production had increased: factories were still 
moribund. 
 

COMMENT:  NO EVIDENCE OF LONG-TERM STRATEGY 

¶10.  (C) Park and Kim speculated with emboffs about how DPRK 
authorities might view the current economic situation:  a 
deteriorated formal sector; continued dependence on foreign 
assistance for food and other needs; a growing informal 
sector that provided little revenue to the central government 
and included much smuggling; and emerging income gaps that 
could lead to societal stress.  There was no evidence that 
the DPRK government had a strategic approach to enlarging the 
formal sector, they suggested.  Instead, the strategy 
appeared to be twofold:  for the government, continued 
dependence on outside assistance and probably illicit 
activities (nfi) while waiting for a big payoff such as 
reparations from Japan, and for individuals, a continued 
 
extreme version of laissez faire economics. 
 
VERSHBOW