====== 제 목: 리처드슨 주지사와 프린시피 재향군인부 장관 방한 ======

UNCLAS SEOUL 001112 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL MUNC KS KN
SUBJECT: GOVERNOR RICHARDSON AND FORMER SECRETARY PRINCIPI 
VISIT SEOUL 

REF: SEOUL 1078 


요약:4월 11~12일 서울 방문에서 뉴멕시코 주지사인 빌 리처드슨은과 전 보훈처장관인 프린시피는 북한이 한국 전쟁 당시 사망한 것으로 생각되는 미군들의 시신을 빠르게 이양하는데 협조적이었다고 말했다. 리처드슨-프린시피 특사는 방코 델타 아시아 문제에 해결에 뒤이어 나온 2월 13일의 초기 시행 합의를 진전시키고자 하는 의사가 있다는 견해를 표명했다. 4월 11일 서울에서 특사는 송민순 외교부 장관과 이재정 통일부 장관을 만났다. 4월 12일에는 노무현 대통령을 만났다. 

¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: During an April 11-12 visit to Seoul, New 
Mexico Governor Bill Richardson and former Secretary of 
Veteran's Affairs Principi noted that the DPRK had been 
cooperative in facilitating the transfer of the remains of 
servicemen thought to have died during the Korean War. The 
Richardson-Principi delegation also conveyed its view that 
the DPRK was willing to move forward on the February 13 
Initial Actions agreement following resolution of the Banco 
Delta Asia (BDA) issue. In Seoul on April 11, the delegation 
met with ROK Foreign Minister Song Min-soon and Unification 
Minister Lee Jae-joung. On April 12, the delegation met with 
President Roh Moo-hyun (reftel). END SUMMARY. 

----------------- 
RETURN OF REMAINS 
----------------- 

유해 송환
4월 11일 군사분계선을 거쳐 북한에서 남한으로 들어온 뉴멕시코 주지사 빌 리처드슨과 전 보훈처 장관 앤서니 프린시피는 각각 송민순 외교부 장관과 이재정 통일부 장관을 만났다. 리처드슨 주지사는 특사단이 북한을 방문한 주목적은 한국 전쟁 동안 사망한 미군병사들의 유해 송환을 촉진하기 위한 것이라고 설명했다. 이런 한도 내에서 리처드슨은 북한측이 6구의 유해를 송환하는데 있어 선의의 제스처를 보였다고 설명했다.그러나 특사들의 북한 방문과 6구의 유해 송환은 유해 발굴 프로젝트의 재개를 의미하는 것은 아닌 게 분명하다. 유해 발굴 프로젝트는 6자 회담의 진전 속에서 다뤄질 필요가 있다. 리처드슨은 이전 다섯 차례의 북한방문과 이번 방문의 가장 뚜렷한 차이는 평양에 좀 더 상업적 활기가 있었다는 점이라고 말했다. 프린시피 전 장관은 양당 특사의 임무는 사망한 병사들의 가족들에게 중요한 것이며 미국과 북한 사이에 전쟁의 상처를 치유하는데 도움을 주는 것이라고 말했다. 


¶2. (SBU) On April 11, after crossing the Military 
Demarcation Line into South Korea from North Korea, New 
Mexico Governor Bill Richardson and former Secretary of 
Veteran's Affairs Anthony Principi met separately with 
Foreign Minister Song Min-soon and Unification Minister Lee 
Jae-joung. Richardson noted that the delegation's primary 
reason for visiting the DPRK was to facilitate the return of 
remains of missing American servicemen thought to have 
perished during the Korean War. To this extent, Richardson 
explained, the DPRK had made a goodwill gesture in returning 
six sets of remains. It was made clear, however, that the 
delegation's trip to the DPRK and the return of the six 
remains did not indicate a resumption of the remains recovery 
project, which needed to be discussed in the context of 
progress of Six-Party Talks, he said. 
Richardson said that 
the most significant difference from his previous five visits 
to North Korea was that there was more commercial activity in 
Pyongyang this time. Former Secretary Principi added that 
the bipartisan delegation's mission was important to the 
families of the fallen soldiers and also to help heal the 
wounds of war between the United States and North Korea. 

이재정 통일부 장관은 유해 송환을 성공적이라고 묘사했다. 이는 미국과 북한 관계의 개선에 도움이 될 뿐만 아니라 한국 정부가 4월 10~12일 열리는 남북 적십자회담에도 이 문제를 다뤄지길 희망한다고 이 장관은 말했다. 남북 적십자회담은 한국 전쟁 때 한국군 포로와 실종자 문제를 논의하기 위한 것이다. 이 장관은 적십자회담에서 한국 정부는 2가지 메시지를 전달할 것이라고 말했다. (1) 미국 정부는 방코 델타 아시아 문제에서 그 나름 해야 할 부분을 하고 있고, 그래서 북한이 긍정적으로 답해야 하며; (2) 2월 13일의 합의를 실천에 옮기는데 관계 당사국 모두에게 중요하다는 것이다. 이 장관은 미국의 공화, 민주 양당 합동 특사가 북한 핵문제를 해결하고 한반도에 평화를 불러오는데 도움이 되는 역할을 하기를 희망한다고 덧붙였다. 


¶3. (SBU) Unification Minister Lee Jae-joung described the 
return of the remains as a success. It would not only help 
improve U.S.-DPRK relations, but the ROKG hoped to build on 
it in April 10-12 ROK-DPRK Red Cross talks to discuss the 
ROK's own POW and MIA concerns. Lee said that during the Red 
Cross talks the ROKG would deliver two messages: (1) the USG 
was doing its part on BDA, so the DPRK should respond 
positively; and (2) it was important for all sides to 
implement the February 13 agreement. Lee added that he hoped 
that the bipartisan nature of the delegation would play a 
role in helping to resolve the DPRK nuclear issue and bring 
peace to the Peninsula. 
------------------------------------------ 
DPRK INTENDS TO COMPLY WITH 2/13 AGREEMENT 
------------------------------------------ 
북한은 2월 13일 합의에 따를 의향이 있다.
리처드슨은 북한이 비핵화 문제에 진지하다는 인상을 받았다는데 견해를 같이했다. 그러나 방코 델타 아시아 문제에는 인색하고 까다로웠다고 밝혔다. 북한은 특히 방코 델타 아시아의 북한 계좌가 풀어졌다는 미국 재무성의 발표를 환영했다. 그러나 북한은 좀 더 취해질 조치들이 있으며, 예컨대 자금을 직접 북한으로 전달되도록 해야 한다는 것이다. 그러나 북한은 2월 13일의 합의를 지키겠다고 재확약했다. 그리고 북한 당국자들은 리처드슨에게 방코 델타 아시아의 자신들 계좌에 돈이 되돌아오는 “그 다음 날” 국제원자력기구의 사찰관들을 북한에 초대할 준비가 돼 있다고 말했다. 

¶4. (SBU) Richardson shared his impression that the North 
Koreans were serious about denuclearizing, but they were 
being petty and difficult about the Banco Delta Asia (BDA) 
issue. In particular, the North Koreans had welcomed the 
announcement by the U.S. Treasury that DPRK accounts in BDA 
had been unblocked, but they expected more still to be done, 
for instance, having the money hand-delivered to them. They 
did, however, reaffirm their commitment to the February 13 
agreement and told Richardson that they were ready to invite 
IAEA inspectors into the DPRK "the next day" after the BDA 
funds were returned. 

프린시피는 북한 관리들이 자신들의 방북 기간 동안 6자 회담에 대한 이행 의사를 표했으며 방코 델타 아시아 문제가 해결되면 비핵화 의무를 준수하겠다고 재확약했다고 거듭해 말했다. 프린시피는 힐 차관보가 방코 델타 아시아 문제를 해결하는데 탁월했으나 이제 공은 북한 쪽에 넘어가 있다고 말했다. 프린시피는 아주 약간의 낙관적인 느낌을 갖고 북한을 떠났다고 말했다. 그러면서 성공하기 위해서는 충분한 결심과 초점과 원칙이 필요하다고 덧붙였다. 

¶5. (SBU) Principi reiterated that DPRK officials during the 
delegation's visit expressed a commitment to the Six-Party 
Talks and reaffirmed that they would fulfill denuclearization 
obligations once BDA was resolved. Principi said that A/S 
Hill had done an extraordinary job in helping to resolve the 
BDA issue, but now the ball was in the DPRK's court. 
Principi said he departed the DPRK with a slight sense of 
optimism, adding that now sufficient resolve, focus, and 
discipline were needed to succeed. 

송민순 외교부 장관은 북한이 2월 13일의 합의를 준수하는데 진지하다는 인상을 받았다는 리처드슨의 인상에 대해 동의를 나타냈다. 방코 델타 아시아에 대해 그는 북한 사람들에게 가장 큰 관심은 미화 2500만 달러 그 자체의 문제라기 보다는 국제 은행계의 한 멤버로서 정통성이라는 점을 강조했다. 송 장관은 이 문제를 어떻게 진행하는가에 대해 북한 내부에서 소통의 문제가 있는 것처럼 보인다고 관측했다. 과거 북한의 결정은 매우 “급격하게” 이뤄졌으며 그래서 그는 일을 진척시킬 수 있는 결정이 어느 때라도 이뤄질 수 있다고 생각했다. 송 장관은 공은 북한에 있다는 데 동의했다; 방코 델타 아시아의 자금은 동결에서 풀려났으며 그들은 이제 조치를 취해야 한다. 송 장관은 북한이 무슨 조치를 다음 단계로 취할지 생각하는 것은 성급하다고 말했다. 


¶6. (SBU) Song agreed with Richardson's impression that the 
North Koreans were serious about their intent to comply with 
the February 13 agreement. On BDA, he stressed that the biggest concern for the North Koreans was their legitimacy as 
a member of the international banking community, rather than 
the issue of the USD 25 million itself. Song speculated that 
there seemed to be a communication problem within North Korea 
about how to proceed. In the past, DPRK decisions have been 
made very "abruptly," so he thought that a decision to move 
forward could come anytime. Still, Song agreed that the ball 
was now in the North Korean's court; now that BDA funds were 
unfrozen, they had to take action. Song said that it was 
premature to think about what course of action the North 
Koreans would take next. 
--------------------- 
NORTH-SOUTH RELATIONS 
--------------------- 
북-남 관계
리처드슨은 이재정 통일부 장관에게 6차례의 북한 방문 후에 북한의 리더십이 고립되고 예측이 어렵다는 사실을 알았다고 말했다. 북한으로 하여금 인권의 중요성과 가족 재결합의 중요성을 보다 잘 이해하게 하는 것은 남한과 좀 더 잦은 접촉을 하는 것이다. 우리는 6자 회담과 북한이 휴전 협정을 넘어 일을 진전시키도록 하기 위해서는 외교가 필요하다. 북한은 남한 정부와 관계를 다른 6자 회담의 멤버들과 관계보다 더 좋은 것으로 복 있다는 인상을 받았다. 그래서 북한이 비핵화를 하고 개혁을 하는데 있어 남한 정부의 역할이 핵심적이다. 그는 한국 정부가 아마도 북한의 농촌 지역 빈곤을 해결하고, 인적 교류 확대를 위해 더 많은 일을 해야 할 것 같다고 말했다. 그는 또 한국 정부가 북한을 돕기 위해 어떤 극적인 조치를 취할 수 있을 지에 대해 생각해야 한다고도 말했다. 

¶7. (SBU) Richardson told Unification Minister Lee that after 
six visits to the DPRK, he found North Korean leadership to 
be isolated and unpredictable. What would help the DPRK 
better understand the importance of human rights and family 
reunions was more contact with the ROK. We needed diplomacy 
in the Six-Party Talks and engagement with the DPRK to move 
beyond the Armistice Agreement. It was his impression that 
the DPRK saw its relationship with the ROKG as better than 
with other Six-Party members, so the ROKG role in encouraging 
the DPRK to denuclearize and reform was key. 
He suggested that, perhaps, the ROKG should do more to address rural poverty in the DPRK and to increase people-to-people 
exchanges. The ROKG should think about what dramatic step it 
could take to help the DPRK, he said. 

이재정 장관은 그는 리처드슨의 의견에 100% 동의한다고 말했다. 6자 회담과 북남 대화는 함께 돌아가는 2개의 바퀴와 같다. 때때로 6자 회담이 북남 대화를 도울 수 있고, 때에 따라서는 북남 대화가 6자 회담에 추진력을 부여할 수 있다. 한국 정부는 북한과 관계 개선을 위해 3가지 방향에서 접근하고 있다. 첫째, 한국 정부는 북남 대화를 다양한 문화적, 사회적, 인도주의적 분야에서 지지하고 있다. 둘째, 남한 정부는 북한 사람들에게 자본주의 시장 시스템에 대해 가르침을 주는 개성공단에서와 같이 경제협력을 지지했다. 마지막으로, 남한 정부는 합동 프로그램들을 지지했다. 북한 유소년 축구팀과 태권도 팀의 방문 그리고 2000년 남북 정상회담을 기념하기 위한 특사파견과 8.15 기념 등이 그 것이다. 이 장관 자신도 북한의 농업을 발전시키는데 헌신했다. 십 년 전 통일부 장관이 되기 전에 이 장관은 농부와 농부를 이어주는 농업 프로그램에 관여했다. 예를 들면 북한의 농촌을 돕기 위한 씨감자 프로젝트가 그 것이다. 지금은 장관으로서 북한의 농업 소출을 증진시키기 위해 북한에 비료 보내기를 지원하고 있다.

¶8. (SBU) Lee said that he agreed "100 percent" with the 
Governor's opinion. The Six-Party Talks and North-South 
dialogue were like two wheels that turned together. At times 
the Six-Party Talks could help North-South dialogue and at 
times North-South dialogue could help propel the Six-Party 
Talks. The ROKG had a three-prong approach to improving 
relations with the DPRK. First, the ROKG was supporting 
North-South dialogue in various cultural, social, and 
humanitarian fields. Second, the ROKG supported economic 
cooperation, as in the Kaesong Industrial Complex that would 
teach North Koreans about capitalism and the market system. 
Finally, the ROKG supported joint programs, such as visits of 
the DPRK youth soccer teams, the DPRK taekwondo team, and 
delegations to commemorate the June 2000 inter-Korean summit 
and August 15 Liberation Day. Lee himself was also committed 
to improving DPRK agriculture. Ten years ago, before he 
became Unification Minister, Lee said he had been involved in 
farmer-to-farmer agricultural programs, such as seed 
potatoes, to help DPRK rural sectors. Now, as minister, Lee 
supported giving the DPRK fertilizer aid to help the DPRK 
raise its agricultural yields. 

2차 남북 정상회담 문제에 대해 송 장관은 남한 정부의 원칙은 확고하다고 말했다: 현재 진행되고 있는 6자 회담과 한반도의 상황을 고려할 때 정상회담 개최를 위한 회담 개최는 권할만하지 않다. 그 보다는 한국 정부는 남북 관계에서 실질적인 진전과 북한의 비핵화가 현실적으로 정상회담을 통해 기대될 경우에만 정상회담을 추구한다. 리처드슨은 북한은 남한을 높게 평가하고 있는 것처럼 보였다고 언급했다. 그의 의견으로는 가까운 장래에 북-남 정상회담이 열릴 가능성을 배제할 수 없다. 


¶9. (SBU) On the issue of a second North-South summit, Song 
said that the ROKG principle was firm: holding a summit "for 
the sake" of holding a summit was inadvisable given ongoing 
Six-Party Talks and the situation on the Korean Peninsula. 
Rather, the ROKG would pursue a summit only if real progress 
in inter-Korean relations and denuclearization of the North 
could be realistically expected to result from the summit. 
Richardson noted that the North Koreans seemed to regard the 
South highly. In his opinion, the North Koreans had not 
ruled out the possibility of a North-South summit in the near 
future. 

------------------------------------ 
U.S.-ROK ALLIANCE IN EXCELLENT SHAPE 
------------------------------------ 
미-한 동맹은 아주 좋은 상태

송 장관은 미국과 한국의 동맹 관계는 아주 좋은 상태라고 말했다. 그는 한미 FTA의 타결과 2012년 전작권을 이양하기로 한 2월 23일의 합의, 주한미군기지의 이전을 특히 대표적인 예로 꼽았다. 상호 동맹과 미래 양국의 공통적 이해를 충족시킬 수 있는 동맹으로 모습을 갖춰 가는 것은 한국 정부에게 최우선 과제라고 송 장관은 말했다. 송 장관은 국회가 FTA를 비준토록 하는 것은 어려운 일이라고 말했다. 그는 그러나 자신과 함께 한덕수 총리와 김현종 통상교섭본부장이 국회 비준을 위해 열심히 노력하고 있다고 밝혔다. 미국 의회의 비준 또한 어려울 것이라고 말하면서, 버시바우 대사는 한국의 소고기 시장을 여는 것이 도움이 될 것이라고 말했다. 송 장관은 세계 동물 건강기구(OIE)가 미국 소고기의 안전성에 대해 결론을 내리기만 하면, 미국 소고기의 반입을 금지하거나 수입을 재개하는데 필요한 절차의 지연은 없을 것이라고 말했다. 

¶10. (SBU) Song noted that the U.S.-ROK Alliance was in 
excellent shape, highlighting the conclusion of the KORUS 
FTA, the February 23 agreement to transfer wartime 
operational command (OPCON) in 2012, and progress in 
relocating U.S. military bases. The bilateral alliance, and 
shaping the alliance to meet our future common needs, were 
top priorities for the ROKG, he said. Song said that 
securing FTA ratification by the National Assembly would be a 
tough task, but that he, as well as Prime Minister Han 
Duck-soo and Trade Minister Kim Hyun-chong, were already hard 
at work lobbying for its ratification. Noting that U.S. 
Congressional ratification would also be difficult, 
Ambassador Vershbow said that opening the Korean market for 
U.S. beef imports would help. Song said that once the World 
Organization for Animal Health (OIE) made a determination on 
the safety of U.S. beef, there would be no reason to ban U.S. 
beef or delay the procedures necessary to resume U.S. beef 
imports. 
리처드슨-프린시피 특사는 이러한 메시지를 확실히 할 기회를 갖지 못했다. 
¶11. (U) The Richardson-Principi delegation did not have an 
opportunity to clear this message. 
STANTON