====== 제 목: 정치적 주요 변수는 한나라당 이명박 후보에게 유리 ======


C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003086 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL KN KS
SUBJECT: ALL KEY POLITICAL FACTORS FAVOR GNP CANDIDATE LEE 
MYUNG-BAK 

REF: SEOUL 3018 

Classified By: CDA Bill Stanton. Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 

요약: 대통령 선거까지 단 68일이 남은 상황에서 진보 캠프가 한나라당 후보인 이명박을 따라 잡을 수 있다는 조짐은 없다. (10월 5일 SBS-한국일보 여론조사에서 이명박은 47.6%, 가장 근접한 다른 후보는 11.3%를 얻었다) 물론 일단 단일 진보파 후보가 떠오르면 경합은 치열해질 것이다. 그러나 연합 새민주당의 예비 선거는 국민적 관심을 끌지 못했고, 최근 진보적 유권자들에 대한 여론조사에서 응답자의 56%가 그들은 이명박이 어쨌든 승리할 것이라고 인정했다. 정동영 후보의 리드는 안정적이지만 다른 단일 새 민주당 후보들인 손학규와 이해찬과 격차가 줄어들고 있다. 그러나 예비 경선의 규칙이 자고 나면 바뀌고 있기 때문에 누가 10월 15일 후보가 될지를 예상하는 것은 불가능하다. 과거 한국의 선거 결과를 좌우했던 핵심 요소들, 즉 지역주의, 국가주의, 반미 감정은 이번 선거에서 이명박에게 타격을 줄 것 같지 않다. 대신 한국의 장래 경제 안보에 초점이 맞춰질 것 같다. 


¶1. (C) Summary: With just 68 days until the presidential 
election, there is no indication that the liberal camp will 
be able to overcome Grand National Party (GNP) candidate Lee 
Myung-bak's lead. (In an October 5 SBS-Hankook Ilbo poll, Lee 
received 47.6 percent support to 11.3 percent for his closest 
rival.) Of course once a single liberal candidate emerges, 
the race will tighten, but the United New Democratic Party 
(UNDP) primary has attracted little national interest and in 
one recent poll of liberal voters, 56 percent admitted they 
expected Lee would win no matter what. Chung Dong-young has 
a comfortable but shrinking lead over the other UNDP 
hopefuls, Sohn Hak-kyu and Lee Hae-chan, through the first 
stages of the primary but since the primary rules continue to 
change each day, it is impossible to predict who will emerge 
as the candidate on October 15. Key factors that have helped 
determine the outcome of past ROK elections -- coalitions, 
regionalism, nationalism, and anti-U.S. sentiment -- are 
unlikely to derail Lee during this election, which instead is 
focused on Korea's future economic security. End Summary. 

한국 정치판에는 대통령 선거의 해, 9월에서 12월까지는 주요 주자들이 후보가 된다는 원리 같은 게 있다. 2007년 선거 시즌은 노무현 대통령이 무대의 주요 인물로 남아있는 점이 기존 선거와 다르다. 왜냐면 진보파 후보들이 아직 부상하지 않고 있고, 노무현 정부는 스캔들이 상대적으로 적으며 10월 2~4일의 북남 정상회담이 그의 인기를 높여주고 있는 상황이기 때문이다. 2007년 선거는 몇몇 다른 이유로 2002년 선거와 같지는 않을 것이다. 이들 요인은 모두 이명박 후보를 돕고 있다. 국가주의와 반미감정의 쇠퇴, 과거에 대한 탄식보다는 미래에 대한 관심, 선거의 핵심적 관심사로써 경제 중시 등이 그 것이다. 게다가 현재는 잘 되지 않고 있는 정치 연합이 과거에는 대통령 선거 결과를 좌우하는 주요 요소 중의 하나였다. 그러나 올해는 진보파, 무소속, 시민단체 사이의 가장 중요한 정치연합이 이뤄질 것 같지 않다. 반면 한나라당의 라이벌인 박근혜와 이명박의 연합이 그들보다 더 낫다. 

¶2. (C) There is a truism in Korean politics that in a 
Presidential election year, from September until the election 
in December, the main actors are the candidates. The 2007 
election season is different from previous elections in that 
President Roh has managed to remain on the stage because a 
liberal candidate has yet to emerge, his administration has 
been relatively free from scandal, and the North-South summit 
on October 2-4 boosted his popularity. The 2007 election is 
also unlike the 2002 election for several other important 
reasons, all of which bolster GNP Candidate Lee Myung-bak. 
These are the wane in nationalism and anti-Americanism as 
political factors, the shift in focus toward future prospects 
rather than the past grievances and an emphasis on the 
economy as the key election concern. In addition, political 
coalitions, or the lack thereof, have been one of the 
principal determinants the outcome of presidential elections 
in the past. This year, however the most important coalition 
will likely not be any union between liberal, independent and 
NGO forces, but rather of GNP rivals Park Geun-hye and Lee 
Myung-bak. 

----------------------------------------- 
KEY FACTORS IN PAST ELECTIONS: COALITIONS 
----------------------------------------- 
과거 선거에서 핵심 요소들: 연대
단 20년 간의 자유 선거 역사를 가진 한국에서 선거를 결정짓는 딱 하나의 가장 중요한 요소를 뽑아내기는 어렵다. 그러나 두드러지는 하나가 있다: 연대가 되느냐 잘 되지 않느냐이다. 하나로 힘을 합하는데 실패한 양 김의 실패(김대중과 김영삼)은 노태우에게 1987년 선거에서 승리를 안겨줬다. 1997년 김대중과 김종필의 연합, 그리고 한나라당에서 이인제의 탈당은 이회창을 물리치고 김대중이 승리하도록 했다. 1992년 선거에서 김영삼은 효과적은 3당을 하나로 묶었다. 그리고 광범위한 지지를 얻어서 김대중을 패퇴시켰다. 2002년11월 26일 노무현과 무소속인 정몽준의 여론조사에 따른 극적인 연대는 노의 승리로 귀결됐다. 

¶3. (C) After only 20 years of free elections in South Korea, 
it is hard to single out the most important factor in 
determining elections, but one stands out: coalitions or the 
lack thereof. The failure of the two Kims (Kim Dae-jung and 
Kim Young-sam) to join forces led to Noh Tae-woo's victory in 
1987 and Kim Dae-jung's union with Kim Jong-pil - coupled 
with Rhee In-jae splitting from GNP Candidate Lee Hoi-chang - 
led to Kim Dae-jung's victory in 1997. Leading up to the 
1992 election, Kim Young-sam effectively merged three 
political parties, captured wide support, and defeated Kim 
Dae-jung. In 2002, Roh Moo-hyun's dramatic November 26 
partnership with independent candidate Chung Mong-joon, based 
on a poll result, led Roh to victory. 

GNP COALITION - WILL IT STAY TOGETHER? 
-------------------------------------- 
한나라 연대- 지속될 수 있을까 
논란이 있지만 2007년 선거에서 가장 강력한 주역들은 보수 한나라당의 후보인 이명박과 박근혜이다. 이들을 뒤이어 노무현도 무대의 주요 등장인물이다. 박과 이는 개인적으로 인상적인 전국적 조직을 키워나갔고 1년간에 걸친 한나라당의 예비선거 과정에서 정치적인 지지를 이끌어냈다. 많은 사람들이 사실상 8월 20일 이명박이 예비선거에서 승리하기 전까지 서로 다른 2개의 당을 형성해왔기 때문에 갈라질 것이라고 관측했다. 

¶4. (C) Arguably the strongest political actors in 2007 are 
conservative Grand National Party (GNP) Candidate Lee 
Myung-bak and GNP runner-up Park Geun-hye, followed by 
President Roh Moo-hyun. Park and Lee individually developed 
impressive nationwide organizations and political support in 
the year-long run-up to the GNP primary. Many speculated in 
fact, that the two would split since they had essentially 
formed two separate parties before the August 20 primary 
victory by Lee Myung-bak. 

이명박과 박근혜의 경쟁관계는 여전히 치열하다. 박 캠프는 여전히 불만의 목소리가 가득하다. 박근혜가 선거인단 투표에서 승리하고도 여론조사에서 앞서 이명박이 승리했기 때문이다. (예비선거는 선거인단 80%, 여론조사 20%의 비율로 결정됐다) 박의 측근 가운데 상당수는 응당 그들이 차지할 수 있음에도 불구하고 이명박 선거 캠프에서 핵심 보직을 얻지 못할 것이라고 주장한다. 그럼에도 불구하고 한나라당 혹은 비 한나라당의 대부분 전문가들은 박근혜가 이명박과 함께 할 것이며 이명박의 승리를 위해 충분히 노력할 것이라고 예상한다. 많은 사람들이 박근혜(55세)가 이미 지난 2002년 대통령이 되기 위해 한나라당을 탈당했기 때문에 정치적 미래를 위해 이번에는 당에 잔류해야 한다고 말했다. 

¶5. (C) Their rivalry has not diminished. There is still 
grumbling in the Park camp because, even though Park "won" 
the electoral college vote in the primary, Lee secured the 
nomination thanks to stronger support in the public poll. 
(The primary was determined 80 percent by electoral college 
vote and 20 percent by a public poll.) Some of Park's aides 
also claim she and her followers are not getting the key 
positions in the Lee election camp they deserve. 
Nonetheless, most experts in and out of the GNP predict that 
Park will stay with Lee and work just hard enough to ensure a 
Lee victory. Many note that since Park (age 55) already left 
the GNP in 2002 in an attempt to gain the presidency, she 
must now stay in the party to build for her political future. 




박근혜의 목표는 이명박의 승리를 지키는 것뿐만이 아니라 당에 대한 통제력을 확보하는 것이다. 이명박이 그의 지도력을 유지한다면 박근혜는 이재오에 의한 당 장악과 맞서 싸워야 하는 어려운 시간을 갖게 될 것이다. 이재오는 차기 한나라당 대표를 노리고 있는 이명박의 핵심 측근이다. 만약 이명박이 선거가 있기 전 휘청거린다면 그는 박근혜로부터 더 큰 도움이 필요하다. 박근혜는 이런 기회를 스스로의 힘으로 당을 장악할 수 있는 기회로 활용할 수 있다. 2008년 총선에서 그녀의 측근들을 국회의원 후보로 더 많이 지명할 수 있는 것만큼 이는 중요하다. 

¶6. (C) Park's goal during the campaign is therefore not only 
to ensure a Lee victory, but also to secure control of the 
party. If Lee maintains his commanding lead, Park will have 
a difficult time wresting control of the party from lawmaker 
Lee Jae-oh, Lee's key advisor who is clearly angling to be 
the next GNP party chair. If Lee stumbles before the 
election, however, and needs more help from Park, she could 
use that opportunity to gain control for herself and, just as 
important, more legislative nominations for her faithful in 
the April 2008 general election. 

UNDP COALITIONS - UNLIKELY TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE? 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
새로운 민주당 연합- 차별화를 할 수 있을 것 같지 않은데?
새로운 연합 민주당은 12월 선거에서 그들의 후보가 승리할 것이라는 희망을 접을 수도 있다. 그러나 승리를 믿는 사람들은 통합이 이뤄진다면 민주당 후보가 승리할 수도 있다고 관측한다. 한 예로, 민주당 후보(이인제처럼), 무소속 문국현 후보, 명지대 총장이자 유명 크리스천인 정근모, 이수성 전 총리와 다른 인물들이 자신들의 후보를 지지하고, 주요 각료 자리나 정치적 이득에 대한 약속을 얻는 식이 된다면 승리가 가능하다는 것이다. 불행히도 대부분의 선거 전문가들은 선거 연합 구축이 유권자들의 흥미를 불러 일으키기에 충분하지 않을 것 같다고 예상한다.



¶7. (C) In the UNDP, many have given up hope that their 
candidate can win in December. True believers still 
speculate, however, that an exciting string of possible 
mergers could boost the eventual UNDP candidate to victory. 
For example, the Democratic Party nominee (likely Rhee 
In-jae), independent candidates Moon Kuk-hyun, Myungji 
University President and prominent Christian Chung Keun-mo, 
former Prime Minister Lee Su-song, and others would like to 
merge with the UNDP candidate and win either the promise of a 
prime ministership or other political gains. Unfortunately 
for the UNDP, most election experts expect coalition building 
will likely not be enough to pique voters' interest. 

우리당은 6월 해체되고 단지 2개월 전 신 민주당이 급하게 결성됐기 때문에 신 민주당의 조직과 질서는 약한 상태이다. 그 결과 소소한 내부 정치 갈등이 전면에 부각되고 있다. 한 예로 이해찬과 정동영은 한 빌딩에 사무실을 두고 있으며 이해찬의 스탭 가운데 한 사람이 정동영의 지지자들이 같은 엘리베이터를 이용하는 걸 거부하면서 양측 캠프 사이에 공개적인 대립이 있었다. 이런 갈등과 계속되고 있는 경선 룰에 대한 힘겨루기 그리고 경선을 그만두겠다는 손학규의 위협 등이 이들 주자들에 대한 일반인들의 관심을 감소시키고 있다. 또한 당 조직 내에서 좀 더 많은 갈등을 야기하고 있다. 예비 경선이 시작되기 수주 전에 급조된 데 더해 당의 최고위원회는 정치적 경험이 아예 없거나 거의 없는 시민단체 대표들을 포함하고 있다. 이들의 참여는 당에 또 다른 압력이 되고 있고, 일련의 실수들을 초래했다. 

¶8. (C) Since the Uri Party dissolved in June and the UNDP 
was hastily established a mere two months ago, the UNDP'S 
organization and discipline remain weak. As a result, many 
of the usual petty internal political conflicts have become 
front-page fodder. For example, Lee Hae-chan and Chung 

Dong-young have offices in the same building and there was a 
recent public stand-off between the two camps when Lee's 
staff refused to let Chung's supporters ride in the same 
elevator. These flare-ups coupled with continued wrangling 
about primary rules and Sohn Hak-kyu's threats to quit the 
race have decreased public interest in all these UNDP 
candidates and also caused more fractures within the party 
organization (reftel). In addition to its rapid 
establishment only weeks before the primary began, the UNDP's 
supreme council includes NGO representatives with little or 
no political experience. Their participation has generated 
additional pressure on the party and resulted in a series of 
public missteps. 

갤럽 코리아의 전 오너이자 이명박 대통령의 수석 고문인 최시중은 최근 우리들에게 현재의 가장 근접한 진보파 후보들에 대해 이명박 후보가 30% 이상 리드하고 있다는 사실은 의미가 없는 것이라고 말했다; 10월 15일 신 민주당의 후보가 확정되면 최대 20%까지 지지율이 올라 가고 다른 후보와 연대가 성사되면 추가로 15~20%까지 지지율을 더 얻을 수 있다고 말했다. 최시중은 눈치 빠른 선거 관측통이자 오랫동안 미국 대사관의 정보통인데, 그는 그럼에도 불구하고 신민주당이 계속해 정치적으로 우를 범할 것이고 그렇게 해서 후보 선택과 추후 이어질 수도 있는 합종연횡에 따른 이득을 최대화하는데 실패할 가능성이 크다고 조심스럽게 낙관했다.

¶9. (C) Choi Shee-joong, former owner of Gallup Korea and 
current senior advisor to Lee Myung-bak, told us recently 
that current polls showing more than a 30 percent lead for 
Lee over the nearest liberal candidate were meaningless; the 
UNDP primary winner could receive up to a 20 percent boost 
upon claiming the candidacy on October 15 and then another 
15-20 percent boost through mergers with other candidates. 
Choi, an astute election observer and long-time Embassy 
contact, said he nonetheless remained cautiously optimistic 
that the UNDP would continue its political follies and 
therefore would fail to capitalize on the selection of the 
candidate or any subsequent mergers. 


------------------------------------------ 
KEY FACTORS IN PAST ELECTIONS: REGIONALISM 
------------------------------------------ 
과거 선거판도를 결정한 요인들: 지역주의
2007년 대선에서 진보파인 신민주당이 이길 수 있다는 희망은 부분적으로는 전라도와 충청도의 지지를 묶어낼 수 있다는 자신감에 바탕을 두고 있다. 이는 진보파가 1997년과 2002년에 이뤄낸 일이기도 하다. 그러나 이명박의 부상과 손학규가 떠오르면서 지역주의의 역할을 줄어들 가능성이 커졌다. 이들 두 후보는 수도권 지역에서 핵심적인 지지를 이끌어내고 있다. (수도권은 한국 인구의 약 40%를 차지하고 있다) 이들 두 후보는 과거 정치 관행과는 달리 특정 지역에 덜 의존하고 있다. 과거 지역간 경제 불균형의 시대는 누가 대통령이고 그가 어느 지역 출신인가에 의존했었는데, 그런 시대는 저물고 있다. 노무현은 이런 점에서 점수를 딸 수 있다. 왜냐면 그는 전통적으로 진보적이었던 전라도 유권자의 지지를 얻을 수 있었고, 그의 고향인 경상남북도에서도 상당한 지지를 이끌어냈기 때문이다. 아이러니하게도 현재는 모든 지역에서 노무현을 싫어하고 있는데 이 것이 진보나 중도파 지지자들을 신민주당 후보 지지로 이끌어내기 어렵게 만드는 요인이 되고 있다. 지역간 불균형의 감소는 덜 감성적인 문제가 되었고 유권자들의 투표 행태에 덜 영향을 끼치게 됐다. 


¶10. (C) The liberal UNDP's hopes to win in 2007 are partly 
based on confidence it can unite the Jeolla and Choongcheong 
provinces behind a single candidate as the liberal camp did 
in 1997 and again in 2002. The emergence, however, of Lee 
Myung-bak as the GNP candidate and Sohn Hak-kyu as a leading 
UNDP candidate has decreased the likely role of regionalism. 
Both these candidates draw core support from the capital 
region (which accounts for 40 percent of the population) 
rather than a particular province as has been past political 
practice. The days of economic imbalance among the regions 
based on who was president and his region of origin have 

waned. Roh Moo-hyun can take some credit for this because he 
was able to win the election with the support of the 
traditional liberal Jeolla vote and also gained significant 
support from his home base in the North and South Gyeongsang 
provinces. Ironically, all regions are generally now united 
in their dislike of Roh, making it harder to rally liberal or 
centrist supporters around any of the UNDP candidates. 
Decreased regional disparities have made regionalism less of 
an emotional issue and less central to how people vote.

유명한 선거 전문가이자 교수인 강원택은 대사에게 최근 오찬에서 민주주의 시스템이 자리를 잡으면서 지역주의 지난 15~20년 동안 지역주의는 선거를 좌우하는 요소로서 힘을 점차 잃어가고 있다고 말했다. 1970년대와 80년대 권위주의 정권과 관련된 불만들이 해결되면서 한국의 민주주의는 미국의 그 것과 유사하게 되었고, 지역주의 덜 기반을 두게 됐다고 말했다. 과거 선거에서 민주주의를 지지하고 권위주의에 반대하는 지도자들은 반 독재에 대한 외침을 개발이 덜 된 전라도의 유권자들을 묶어내는데 이용했다. 그리고 전라도에 정치적 힘의 기반을 두게 됐다. (김대중과 노무현이 둘 다 이 모델을 효과적으로 이용했다). 지금 신 민주당이 인기가 없고, 그래서 12월 선거에서 패배할 수 밖에 없는 이유 가운데 하나는 그들의 새로운 비전과 메시지를 찾는데 실패했기 때문이다. 지역주의에 기반하고 그들의 진짜 민주주의 전통을 자랑하는 후보들은 지지를 제대로 이끌어 내지 못하고 있다. 이는 이런 이데올로기에 과도하게 의존한 노무현 대통령이 어려운 상황에 처한 한국 경제를 자극하거나 살리는데 무력했다고 대부분의 사람들이 믿기 때문이다. 



¶11. (C) Renowned election expert and professor Kang Won-taek 
told the Ambassador at a recent lunch that regionalism has 
been declining as a factor over the last 15-20 years as a 
result of the consolidation of the democratic system. Most 
grievances related to the authoritarian regimes of the 1970s 
and 1980s have been addressed, so now Korea's democracy is 
more like that of the U.S. and less based on regionalism. In 
past elections, the pro-democracy, anti-dictatorship leaders 
used the rallying cry of anti-authoritarianism to unite the 
voters of the less developed Jeolla Province and built from 
there (both Kim Dae-jung and Roh used this model 
effectively). Now, one of the reasons the UNDP was so 
unpopular and might well lose in December was their failure 
to find a new vision or message. Candidates relying on 
regionalism and touting their "true" democratic heritage had 
drawn little support because most people believed Roh's 
over-reliance on these ideological themes have done nothing 
to stimulate or to revive a desultory Korean economy. 
------------------------------------------ 
KEY FACTORS IN PAST ELECTIONS: NATIONALISM 
------------------------------------------ 
과거 선거를 좌우한 핵심 요소들: 국가주의 
2002년 월드컵 4강과 함께 한국의 국가주의는 최고 수준에 있었다. 또 한국 경제는 1997~8년 아시아 경제 위기로부터 기적적으로 회복돼 있었다. 2002년 여름, 2명의 여학생이 사고로 미군 차량에 의해 숨지고 뒤이어 책임 있는 병사에 대한 무죄 방면은 전국적인 분노를 야기시켰다. 2002년 자부심과 국가주의는 미국을 향해 쌓인 분노의 분출과 함께 대통령 선거에서 승리한 노무현 대통령에 의해 효과적으로 이용됐다. 노대통령은 한국의 독립을 강조하고 젊은 유권자들 사이에 반미 감정의 불꽃을 지폈다. 지금은 그런 분위기는 없다. 많은 전문가들은 국가적인 열등감이 최근에야 선진국 반열에 오른 나라로써 한국에서 사라지지는 않았지만, 노무현 정부가 미국 한국 관계를 잘못 다루고 일반적으로 외교에서 보인 무능함은 미국과 관계에서 한국이 좀 더 주의를 기울여야 한다는 일반적인 정서를 야기시켰다고 지적했다. 

¶12. (C) In 2002, with a fourth place finish in the World Cup 
fresh in voters' minds, Korean nationalism was at a high 
level. Also, the Korean economy had recovered almost 
miraculously from the 1997-8 Asian financial crisis. In the 
summer of 2002, two Korean schoolgirls were accidentally 
killed by a U.S. military vehicle and the subsequent U.S. 
military acquittal of the responsible soldiers sparked 
nationwide outrage. The pride and nationalism of 2002, 
coupled with a release of built-up resentment toward the 
U.S., were used effectively by Roh Moo-hyun to win the 
presidency, as he trumpeted Korean independence and fanned 
the flames of anti-U.S. sentiment among young voters. There 
is no such mood now. Many experts note that while the 
national inferiority complex that Korea has as a recently 
developed country has not disappeared, Roh's mishandling of 
the U.S.-ROK relationship and his general diplomatic 
ineptitude have generated an overall feeling that Korea 
should pay more attention to its relationship with the U.S. 
2002년 반미 감정은 정책적인 이유로 떠오른 게 아니라 이상하게도 올림픽 때문에 유발됐다. 그리하여 미국을 노무현 정부와 진보파 지도자들에게 만만한 정치적 목표물로 만들었다. 2002년 겨울 올림픽은 미국에 대한 반감을 일으키게 만들었다. 바로 아폴로 오노 선수가 쇼트 트랙 스피드 스케이팅에서 금메달을 차지하면서이다. 그는 한국 스케이터가 (한국인 들의 눈에) 의문스러운 파울을 이유로 탈락하면서 금메달을 땄다. 이러한 상실감은 한국의 축구 스타인 안정환이 2002년 월드컵에서 미국을 상대로 한 게임에서 골 세리머니를 하면서 스케이팅을 하는 듯한 자세를 보여줌으로써 좀 더 유명해졌다. 물론 6월 2명의 여학생을 숨지게 한 미군 차량 사고가 미국에 대한 더 큰 대중들의 분노를 야기했다. 그러나 스포츠에서 발생한 효과 또한 간과될 수 없다. 



¶13. (C) In 2002, emotional sentiment against the U.S. arose 
not for policy reasons but, oddly, because of the Olympics, 
making the U.S. an easy political target for candidate Roh 
and many liberal leaders. The 2002 Winter Olympics started 
to tilt the emotional balance against the U.S. when American 
Apollo Ohno was awarded a gold medal in short track speed 
skating after a Korean skater was disqualified for a 
questionable (to South Korean eyes) foul. This loss was made 
more famous when Korean soccer star Ahn Joung-whan pretended 
to skate in his post-goal celebration in the 2002 World Cup 
game against the U.S. Of course, the USFK vehicle that 
killed two schoolgirls in June resulted in the greatest 
public outcry and anger against the U.S., but the sporting 
events' effect should not be dismissed. 


2007년에는 상황은 미국에 유리한 방향으로 변했다. 무엇보다 북한에 대한 우리의 전략 변화가 미국이 한국을 보다 존중하는 것으로 일반적으로 해석되고 있다. 게다가 4월 버지니아 테크에서 일어난 한국계 미국인에 의한 총기 살해 사고에 대한 미국에서 별다른 대중들의 비난이 없다는 점이 많은 한국인들을 놀라게 만들었다. 그리고 그들로 하여금 미국을 좀 더 밝게 보게 만들었다. 대부분의 한국인들은 만일 한국에서 한국인이 아닌 자들이 그 같은 짓을 저질렀다면 그가 속한 나라에 대한 강력한 항의가 있었을 것이며 보복까지도 있을 수 있다는 점을 인정하고 있다. 미국은 2012년 전시작전권을 한국에 넘기기로 함으로써 미국이 선거에서 목표물이 될 수도 있는 또 다른 이슈를 사전에 제거했다. 


¶14. (C) In 2007, the balance is tilted well in our favor. 
First and foremost, our shift in tactics toward North Korea 
is widely interpreted as the U.S. showing South Korea more 
respect. Moreover, the lack of public outcry in the U.S. 
against Korea after the horrible killing spree in April by a 
Korean-American at Virginia Tech amazed many South Koreans 
and made them see the U.S. in a better light. Most Koreans 
readily admitted that if a non-Korean had gone on a shooting 
spree in Korea, there would have been an outcry against that 
nation and even reprisals against those of the same 
nationality. The U.S. agreed to transfer wartime operational 
control to Korea in April 2012, eliminating another issue 
that could have been used to target the U.S. as an election 
issue. 




한미 FTA의 성공적인 결말 또한 과소평가되어서는 안 되는 또 다른 긍정적인 역할을 했다. 많은 한국인들은 한미 FTA가 양국이 좀 더 대등한 입장이 되어가는 근본적인 방식에서 양국 관계가 변화하고 있는 상징으로 보고 있다. 이는 거의 모든 한국인들에게 어필하고 있다. 2007년 6월 30일 타결된 FTA 에 대한 지지는 70%를 넘어서고 있다.

¶15. (C) The successful conclusion of the KORUS FTA has also 
played a positive role that should not be underestimated. 
Many Koreans see the FTA as a symbol that the U.S.-ROK 
relationship is evolving in a fundamental way to one that is 
more equal. This appeals to almost all Koreans. The support 
for the agreement, signed on June 30, 2007, hovers around 70 
percent. 

---------------------------------------- 
KEY FACTOR NOW: FUTURE ECONOMIC SECURITY 
---------------------------------------- 
지금의 주요 관건들: 향후 경제 안전
1992년에서 2002년 까지 선거는 한국에서 과거의 정치적 불만을 해결하는데 대해 관심이 있는 것으로 보여지고 있다. 많은 사람들이 김영삼(1992)과 김대중(1997)이 대부분 한국의 민주화에 대한 그들의 기여로 당선됐다고 주장한다. 노대통령은 2002년 출마해서 일본 식민시기에 관련된 문제들을 해결하고, 미국과 관계를 좀 더 동등한 자리에 올려놓겠다고 나선 바탕 위에서 당선됐다. 민주화는 이제 20년 전 일이다. 일본 문제는 여전히 한국 국민들에게 화를 불러 일으킬 수 있다. 그러나 진지한 문제들을 넘어 식민지 시기를 바라봐야 한다는 요청은 더 이상 들리지 않는다. 대부분의 한국인들은 이번 해 선거는 경제와 미래에 대한 것이라고 믿는다. 많은 전문가들은 만약 도덕적 가치와 과거 역사에 대한 문제가 가장 큰 관심사가 된다면 이명박은 과거 이력으로 볼 때 명백하게 선두주자로 떠오르지 않았을 것이라고 말했다. 

¶16. (C) Elections from 1992 to 2002 can be seen as largely 
concerned with addressing past political grievances in Korea. 
Many assert that Kim Young-sam (1992) and Kim Dae-jung 
(1997) were elected mostly as a reward for their 
contributions to the democratization of Korea. Roh ran and 
won in 2002 on a platform geared to address issues related to 
the Japanese colonial period and to put Korea's relationship 
with the U.S. on more equal footing. Democratization is now 
20 years in the past. Japan is still an issue that can rile 
the Korean populace, but calls for looking further into the 
colonial period through more truth commissions are no longer 
heard. Most Koreans believe that this year's election is 
about the economy and the future. Many pundits note that if 
moral values or past history were of paramount concern, Lee 
Myung-bak, with his checkered past would never have emerged 
as the clear front-runner. 

과거를 돌아보기 보다는, 이명박은 미래에 대한 좀 더 매력적인 비전을 성공적으로 제시했다. 경제 활력 재건이라는 모호한 약속과 대운하에 대한 거창한 제안이 그런 것이다. 대부분의 한국인들은 여전히 과거 두 자리 수 성장 시대에 대한 향수에 젖어 있다. 이명박은 현대의 CEO로서 그 같은 성장을 이끈 사람들 가운데 하나였다. 그리고 많은 사람들은 그가 앞으로 향국에 놀라운 성장을 재현할 할 수 있기를 희망한다. 20대와 30대의 젊은이들은 2002년에는 노무현을 지지한 핵심 그룹이었는데, 지금 그들의 가장 큰 관심사는 직장 문제이다. 대부분의 여론조사는 큰 차이로 이명박이 젊은이들의 표를 가져갈 것이라고 예측하고 있다. 

¶17. (C) Rather than the past, Lee has successfully given 
Koreans an attractive vision for the future with his vague 
promises of renewed economic vigor and his grandiose proposal 
for a cross-country canal. Most Koreans still feel nostalgic 
for the double-digit economic growth years of the past. Lee 
was one of the leaders of that growth as CEO of Hyundai and 
many hope he can reproduce that same astounding growth for 
Korea in the years to come. Young people in their 20s and 
30s, who were core Roh supporters in 2002, are now concerned 
first and foremost with job security. Most polls predict Lee 
will win the youth vote by a wide margin. 
현대 경제라는 맥락에서 7% 성장이라는 이명박의 약속을 분석하기 보다는, 유권자들은 서울 시장으로서 이명박이 한 일을 보고 잇다. 청계천 공사와 버스 시스템 개선이 그 같은 것들이다. 그리고 나라 전체를 위해 그가 그 같은 일을 할 수 있기를 희망한다. 경제는 4~5% 성장 선에서 꾸준히 나아가고 잇지만, 많은 한국인들은 경제 계획이 변하지 않는 한 중국과 일본에 의해 샌드위치 신세가 될 것이라고 느낀다. 좀 더 나은 미래에 대한 비전은 이명박에게 보다 유리하게 작용하고 있다.
¶18. (C) Rather than analyzing Lee's promise of seven percent 
growth in the context of the modern economy, voters see what 
Lee did as Seoul Mayor -- uncovering Cheonggye Stream in 
Central Seoul and revamping the bus system -- and hope he can 
do the same for the entire country. While the economy 
continues to chug along at a 4-5 percent growth rate, many in 
Korea feel that if they do not change their economic plan, 
they will be "sandwiched" by China and Japan. The vision of 
a better future favors lee. 

------- 
COMMENT 
------- 


코멘트
신 민주당의 대선 후보는 지금부터 12월 사이에 전력을 다하고, 노무현이 2002년 그랬던 것처럼 유권자들을 흥분시킬 수 있다면 이명박에게 도전할 수 있다. 지금으로서 진보 진영의 그 누구도 이런 일을 할 준비가 돼 있고, 이렇게 할 수 있는 능력이 있다는 징후는 없다. 역동적인 한국에서 지난 5년간 일어난 변화는 보수파 후보를 여러 측면에서 선호하고 있다. 그 가운데 가장 중요한 것은 노대통령이 대통령으로서 실패했다는 널리 퍼져있는 시각이다. 
¶19. (C) The winner of the UNDP primary could challenge Lee 
Myung-bak if that contender does everything right between now 
and December and excites voters as Roh did in 2002. For now, 
there is no indication that he or anyone else in the liberal 
camp would be ready or able to do this. The year 2007 is a 
long way from 2002. In dynamic Korea, the changes that have 
taken place in the last five years favor a conservative 
candidate in many ways, the most important of which is the 
widespread view that Roh has failed as president. 
2002년에 유권자들은 과거 한국의 권위주의를 대표하지 않는 사람이고, 부자 엘리트가 아니라면 누구든 선호했다. 하지만 올해는 노무현을 대신하지 않고, 노무현이 지지한 가치가 아닌 다른 것을 대표하는 사람을 원한다. 지금까지 2007년은 이명박에게 행운의 해였다. 만약 그의 행운이 지속된다면 그는 12월 19일 자신의 방식으로 스스로를 기념하게 될 것이다. 
¶20. (C) While in 2002, voters wanted any politician who did 
not represent Korea's authoritarian past and the wealthy 
elite, this year it appears that voters want anyone who does 
not represent Roh Moo-hyun and what he stood for. So far, 
2007 has been a lucky year for Lee Myung-bak. If his luck 
holds, he will celebrate his wedding anniversary, December 
19, in style. 
STANTON
