^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  07SEOUL3117  |  2007-10-17 06:17  |  기밀  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>KS KN ECON PREL }}  |
====== 제 목: 금강산, 북한에서 한국의 족적이 커지고 있음을 보여주는 현상 ====== 
기 밀 SEOUL 003117 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
 
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 10/17/2017 
태그: ECON(([Economic Conditions])), EINV(([Foreign Investments])), KN(([Korea (North)])), KS(([Korea (South)])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs]))
제 목: 금강산, 북한에서 한국의 족적이 커지고 있음을 보여주는 현상
분류자: 정치 공사 참사관 조셉 윤((POL M/C Joseph Yun)).  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2013/09/17 16:20//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점: 금강산 관련 한국의 관광 기금이 북한에 별 영향도 주지 못하면서 종종 일방적으로 북한의 금고에 옮겨진다고 금강산 관광을 치부한다. 그와는 다르게 개성공업지구는 16,000명의 북한 근로자가 더 낳은 남한 사업의 실례를 접할 기회가 있기 때문에 더욱 혜택이 된다고 본다. 그러나 10월 12~13일 금강산 방문에서 느끼기엔 애초엔 외딴 산행 코스에 불과했지만, 남한 사람들에게 북한을 //“개방”//한다는 측면에서 상당히 의미가 있다는 것이다. 1998년 금강산 사업이 출범한 이후 개발자 현대 아산은 더욱 북방으로 갈 수 있는 옵션에 더해 해안가 호텔과 호화로운 골프 클럽을 비롯해 동해안을 따라 펼쳐지는 10마일 곳곳에 관광지를 추가하였다. 분산된 관광지에 도착하기 위해서 한국 관광객은 (10월 13일에만 기록적인 7,000명이 금강산에 다녀갔고, 이달은 6만을 예상하고 있다) 자연 그대로의 환경이 확연히 드러나는 북한 마을과 농경지를 가로지르게 된다. 덧붙여서 금강산 근로자의 2,700명 중 절반이 넘는 수가 북한 출신이다. 북한 정부 기관들이 금강산에서의 달러 수입의 흐름을 통제하려고 다투고 있는 게 분명하다. 요점 끝.
===== 최고급 휴양지와 가난한 마을 =====

2. (민감하지만 미분류) 10월 12~13일에 대사관 직원은 통일부가 후원하는 금강산 여행에 여타 20개 서울 주재 외교관들과 합류하였다. 금강산 관광은 두 가지 대표적인 남북 경제 협력사업 중 하나이다. 금강산 여행에서 받은 가장 강렬한 인상은 최고급 휴양지와 그 주변 북한 농촌과 마을의 원시성, 그리고 현대 아산 주도의 개발로 금강산 일대를 조용히 탈바꿈시키고 있는 장면이었다.

3. (민감하지만 미분류) 금강산이 남한 관광객에 개방되었던 1998년 이래도 개발회사 현대 아산은 꾸준히 사업 영역을 넓혀 외딴 산행 코스를(역시 확대된) 벗어나 북한 해군 시설 인근 험준한 해안가인 //“해금강”//을 포함해 유명한 호수인 //“삼일포”//, 그리고 해안가 호텔, 그리고 북한 해군 기지로 사용되던 고성을 가로지르는 호화스러운 골프 클럽 등을 포함하였다. 전형적인 3일간의 여행은 이들 모든 지역의 방문을 포함하고 있어 수천 명의 한국 관광객이 매일같이 금강산 휴양지를 둘러싸고 있는 북한의 원시적인 농촌과 마을 정경을 구경한다. 그리고 북한 주민들도 지나쳐 가는 밝은 복장의 관광객들이 버스에 타고 있는 모습을 보게 된다.

4. (기밀) 상기에 나열한 관광지 안팎으로 20분씩 6차례 운행 중에, 북한의 이 지역의 개발이 모자란 점과 고질적인 빈곤을 확연하였다. 금강산의 바로 외곽인 온정리 마을과 그 주변에서 우리는 산업사회 이전 모습을 보았다. 수백명의 주민 중 대부분은 도보로 여행하고 남루한 옷을 착용하고 있었다. 일부는 자전거를 보유하였는데, 종종 짐을 싣고 있었다. 주로 제복 차림의 군인이 승차한 단 4대 혹은 5대의 SUV 차량 주요 금강산 지역으로 가는 접근로와 나란히 있는 도로에서 매번 운행 중에 보이곤 하였다. 농부들은 소와 나무 쟁기로 농토를 일구고 있었다. 제복 차림의 일단의 군인들을 비롯해 여타 농부들은 논에서 작은 도구나 손을 이용하고, 보따리를 머리에 이고 있었다. 농작물이 목재 우마차에 실려 소가 끌거나 손으로 끌었다. 여성들은 강에서 식기와 옷을 세탁하였다. 날씨가 흐렸던 10월 13일을 비롯해 어는 날에도 주택에서 불빛을 찾아볼 수가 없었다. (우리는 이 지역 저녁 풍경을 보지 못했다.) 금강산 일대에 소와 염소 수십 마리가 있었는데, 유럽 출신 외교관은 2004년 중에는 그것마저 없었다고 전한다. 예전에 평양에 주재했던 한 러시아 외교관은 북한 당국자들이 금강산 사업이 시작되자 금강산 일대 예전 거주민의 상당수를 이전시켰다고 한다.

5. (기밀) 그러한 광경과 금강산 휴양지는 극명한 대조를 이루고 있다. 우리는 10개의 건설 자재를 실은 10개의 트럭에 이어 4개의 연료 탱크 차량이 비무장 지대에서 건설이 한창인 12층 이산가족 면회소를 비롯한 현대 아산 건축 부지를 향해 달리는 모습을 보았다. 우리의 여정 중에는 화려한 클럽하우스와 96개 객실이 딸린 화려한 호텔을 포함해 한국의 기업들이 건설하고 있는 미화 1억 천만 달러 골프 코스가 앞서 설명했던 농경지에서 불과 수백 미터 떨어진 곳에 있다. 밤에 금강산 호텔에서 남향을 바라보면, 금강산 휴양지 외각에서 볼 수 있는 유일한 불빛은 금강산 이산가족 면회소에 있는 크레인과 여타 장비의 불빛이 유일했다.

6. (기밀) 북한 인민군의 존재는 분명했지만, 방해되지는 않았다. 매 중간 지점마다 초록색 모직 제복 차림의 인민군이 보초를 서면서, 만일 관광객이 사진을 찍기라도 할라치면 들고 있던 빨간색 깃발을 올린다. (그 결과는 찍은 사진을 삭제한다고 우리는 들었다). 한 마을이 주요한 금강산 복합 단지를 관통하며, 그곳의 인민군 보초들은 보기 드문 차량이 오면 호각을 불어 관광 버스가 해당 지점을 관통하면 새운다. 그 다음으로 북한 사람들은 대부분 도보나 자전거 등을 타고 횡단한다.

7. (기밀) 금강산 지역 몇몇 언덕에는 문짝이 없는 차 한 대나 들어설 주차장처럼 피신처에 장착된 대포와 군 트럭이 자리하고 있었다. 이곳에서 4년을 거주한 금강산 담당 김영현 현대아산 상무는 그가 도착한 이후 건설된 군사 시설이며, 해당 장비가 움직이거나 유지 관리하는 모습은 전혀 보지 못했다고 자청해서 말하였다.
===== 미 달러 현금 경제 =====

8. (기밀) 3일간의 패키지여행에 대한 미화 500~600달러 이외에도(그중 미화 70달러는 북한의 국고로 귀속된다고 알려졌다), 한국 관광객들은 레스토랑, 선물 가계, 그리고 금강산 휴양지 내부 노점상에서 상당한 양의 현금을 사용하는 게 분명하다. 예를 들면 10월 13일 주 주차장 내 100대의 투어 버스가 늘어선 가운데, 여행객들은 송이 버선 700그램을 미화 100달러를 주고 사기 위해 선물 가계 앞에 임시변통 좌판에 줄을 섰다; 송이의 가격은 남한에서보다 고가이다. 금강산에서의 물가는 미국 달러로 액수를 매기지만, 한국 원화도 역시 받는다. 아이러니하게도 미화 100달러는 위폐일까 두려워 받지 않는다.

9. (기밀) 현대 아산 변하영 소장은 다양한 북한 법인 간에 수입의 흐름을 통제하기 위해 경쟁이 나타나고 있다고 말하였지만, 세부 사항에 대해 언급하지 않았다. 북한 고용인의 삶의 터전에 방문할 수는 없지만, 그는 임금과 팁에서(공식적으론 금지되었지만 실제로 줌) 나오는 돈은 이 지역 삶의 수준을 끌어올리고 있다고 덧붙였다. 금강산의 면세품 상점의 관리인이였던 변하영은 상점에 북한 당국자들은 와서는 면세품 상점의 총매상고에 대해 자세한 내용을 물었다며, 북한 고위급 당국자들이 더 많이 알고 싶어한다는 점을 암시한다고 했다.
===== 현대 아산의 규범 =====

10. (기밀) 서부지대에 있는 개성공단과 마찬가지로 금강산의 깨끗한 주변 환경은 현대 아산 덕택이다. 현대 아산은 북한(금강산 근처)에서 태어난 정주영이 설립했고, 그의 개인적 신념에 기초해 남북 포용 정책을 실질적으로 출범시켰다. 금강산 지역은 워키토키를 소지한 부유한 현대 아산 종업원에 의해 효율적으로 관리되고 있다. 총 2,700명의 고용인 중에 1,400명이 현재 북한 주민이지만, 북한 관리자가 있다고 볼만한 흔적은 전혀 없다. 예를 들면 북한의 전력망에서 전기를 공급받는 금강산 호텔은 일단의 외교관이 도착하는 저녁 나절에는 전기가 들어오지 않는다. 현대 아산 관리자들은 자체 발전기 중 하나에서 전기를 가동하는 방법을 찾아냈다. 현대 아산이 고용한 북한 직원은 모두 평양 소재 대학을 졸업한 게 명백하다. 우리 그룹이 말을 걸어본 젊은 산행 가이드는 한국 관광객과 같이 쾌활하고, 고어텍스와 플리스 재킷 차림을 차려입었다. 그러나 우리가 김일성과 김정일의 모자이크를 사진에 담으려고 하자 잽싸게 끼어들면서, 자기들만이 //“친애하는 지도자가 가장 잘 나오게 하는 방법을”// 안다고 고집을 피웠다. 한 미 의회 대표단과 동행한 저번 금강산 방문 중에는 가이드들이 미국의 대북 정책과 6자 회담의 최근 소식에 관한 얘기를 나누고 싶어한다는 사실을 발견하였다.

11. (기밀) 현대 아산은 외교 활동에도 참여하고 있다. 8월 북한에 홍수가 난 이후에 현대아산은 피해 지역에 구호물품 740톤을 제공하였다. 관광객이 금강산 관광지에 도착하기 위해 통과해야 하는 첫 관문인 여러 무장한 검문소를 북한이 제거하도록 이끈 것은 바로 현대아산의 끈질긴 외교이다; 현대 아산은 6개월마다 검문소 한 곳을 제거하기로 합의했다(아마도 다소 대가를 지급하고)고 통일부 엄종식은 우리에게 말하였다. 불교 사원 재건축에 전념하기 위해 10월 13일 금강산에 머물렀던 윤만준 현대아산 사장은 앞으로는 금강산 사업이 더욱 안정될 것으로 예상한다고 외교관 그룹에게 말하였는데, 이는 과거 금융 (예로 한국관광공사로부터 2001년에 빌렸던 미화 7천만 달러) 및 정치적 난관을 암시하는 말이다.
===== 논평 =====

12. (기밀) 한국의 자본이 북한 시장에 진출하고 하면서 투자 지역에 한국의 족적을 점차 확대하고 있다. 일부 남한 사람들은 금강산 사업이 한반도 동해안을 따라 차근차근 //“평화지대”//로 격상시키는 출발점으로 금강산 사업을 그리면서, 예고된 //“서해안 평화지대”//가 개성공단에서 해주까지 서부 해안을 따라 이어지길 마음속 거울에 투영하고 있다. 이러한 계획은 야심차지만, 현대 아산은 이미 상당한 진전을 이루었다. 비무장지대를 횡단한 남한사람의 수가 증가하고(현대 아산의 투자 지역을 담은 그래픽 지도에 매우 밝은 선으로 표시된) 북한의 한 귀퉁이를 구경하는 사람이 증가하는 것은 유의미한 추세이다. 그리고 북한 당국자가 관광을 통해 경화의 축적에 익숙해지는 추세도 올바른 방향이라고 할 수 있다. 엄종식 통일부 통일정책기획관은 남북 관계에서 금강산의 역할에 대해 평가하길 남한 국민은 (10월 2~4일 남북 정상회담에서 하나의 쟁점이었던) //“개방”// 그리고 //“개혁”//이란 말을 거부하는 북한에 대해 너무 신경 쓰지 말아야 한다며, 그 이유는 북한이 //“달콤한 독약”//을 더 많이 원하는 게 분명하기 때문이다. 예로 돈.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/8/07seoul3117|프와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07SEOUL3117.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/17/2017 
TAGS: KS KN ECON PREL
SUBJECT: MT. KUMGANG SHOWS GROWING ROK FOOTPRINT IN DPRK 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Yun.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  Mount Kumgang is sometimes regarded as a 
one-sided transfer of ROK tourist funds to DPRK coffers 
without much prospect of influencing the DPRK.  The Kaesong 
Industrial Complex (KIC), in contrast, is seen as more 
beneficial because 16,000 North Korean workers are exposed to 
South Korean business practices there.  However, an October 
12-13 visit to Mt. Kumgang suggested that this initially 
secluded hiking destination is significant in terms of 
"opening" North Korea to South Koreans.  Since the project 
began in 1998, developer Hyundai Asan has added several 
tourist destinations along a ten-mile stretch of the east 
coast including beachfront hotels and a luxurious golf club, 
with the option to go further north.  To get to the dispersed 
sites, ROK tourists (a record 7,000 were there on October 13, 
with 60,000 expected for the month) traverse North Korean 
villages and farmland, where primitive conditions are plainly 
visible.  In addition, over half of Mt. Kumgang's 2700 
employees are now from the DPRK, and DPRK government entities 
are apparently competing to control Mt. Kumgang's USD revenue 
streams.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
UPSCALE RESORT VS. POOR VILLAGES 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On October 12-13, Emboffs joined 20 other 
Seoul-based diplomats on a Ministry of Unification (MOU) 
sponsored tour of Mt. Kumgang, one of two main South-North 
economic cooperation projects.  The tour's most striking 
impressions were the contrast between the upscale resort 
sites and the primitive neighboring North Korean farmland and 
villages, and the sense that Hyundai Asan-led development is 
quietly transforming the area. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Since 1998, when Mt. Kumgang opened to South Korean 
tourists, developer Hyundai Asan has steadily spread its 
reach beyond the secluded hiking areas (also enlarged) to 
include "Sea Kumgang," a rocky coastal area next to a DPRK 
naval facility, "Samilpo," a famous lake, and beachfront 
hotels, camping areas and a luxurious golf club across from 
Kosong, which used to house a DPRK naval base.  Typical 
three-day package tours include visits to all of these areas, 
so that thousands of ROK tourists each day get a glimpse of 
the primitive North Korean farmland and villages that 
surround the resort areas; and the DPRK residents see the 
busloads of brightly dressed tourists going by. 
 
¶4. (C) During six 20-minute drives to and from the sites 
listed above, the endemic poverty and lack of development of 
this section of North Korea were clear.  In and around the 
village of Onjongri, just outside the main Mt. Kumgang 
complex, we saw many pre-industrial-era scenes.  Most of the 
several hundred people we saw traveled on foot and were 
shabbily dressed.  Some had bicycles, often loaded with bags. 
 Only four or five cars, mostly SUVs carrying uniformed 
soldiers, were visible during each drive on the road that 
paralleled the access road to Mt. Kumgang's main area.  A 
farmer plowed his field with an ox and wooden plow. Other 
farmworkers, including several crews of uniformed soldiers, 
used their hands or small tools in the fields and carried 
bundles on their heads.  Crops were loaded on wooden carts 
pulled by cattle or by hand.  Women washed dishes and clothes 
in the river.  No household lighting was visible during 
either day, including the overcast October 13 (we did not see 
the areas at night).  There were dozens of cattle and goats 
in the area, which a European diplomat said was not the case 
during a 2004 visit.  A Russian diplomat on the trip who 
previously served in Pyongyang said that DPRK authorities had 
moved many prior residents out of the Mt. Kumgang area when 
the project began. 
 
¶5. (C) The contrast between those scenes and the Mt. Kumgang 
resort sites is stark.  We watched as ten truckloads of 
construction supplies, followed by four fuel tankers, drove 
from the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) to Hyundai Asan building 
sites including a 12-story reunion center, where construction 
was in full swing.  Also on our itinerary was the USD 110 
million golf course, including an ornate clubhouse and 
96-room luxury hotel, that an ROK company is building, 
located a few hundred meters away from the farms described 
above.  Looking south from the Mt. Kumgang hotel at night, 
the only lights visible outside the resort's main area were 
on cranes and other equipment at the reunion center 
construction site. 
 
¶6. (C) The Korean People's Army (KPA) presence was clear but 
not obtrusive.  At each junction, KPA sentries dressed in 
green wool uniforms stood guard, holding red flags that 
guides told us they would raise if any tourist took pictures 
(resulting only in making sure the pictures were deleted, we 
were told).  One village road crossed the main Mt. Kumgang 
complex, and KPA sentries there whistled oncoming traffic, 
which was sparse, to a stop when tour buses crossed the 
junction, after which North Koreans, mostly on foot or on 
bicycles, could cross. 
 
¶7. (C) On several hilltops in the area, military trucks and 
what appeared to be artillery were parked in shelters that 
looked like one-car garages without doors.  Kim Young-hyun, 
Hyundai Asan's General Manager for Mt. Kumgang, who has lived 
there for four years, volunteered that the structures were 
built after he arrived, and that he had never seen any of the 
equipment moved or maintained. 
 
---------------- 
USD CASH ECONOMY 
---------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Besides the USD 500-600 for a three-day package tour 
(USD 70 of which reportedly goes into DPRK state coffers), 
ROK tourists clearly spend a significant amount of cash at 
the restaurants, gift shops and vendors inside the Mt. 
Kumgang resort areas.  For example, with 100 tour buses in 
the main parking lot on October 13, tourists lined up at a 
makeshift stand in front of the main gift shop to pay USD 100 
for 700 grams of pine mushrooms; prices for this delicacy are 
higher in South Korea.  Mt. Kumgang's prices are denominated 
in USD, but Korean won are also accepted.  Ironically, USD 
100 bills are not accepted out of fear of counterfeit notes. 
 
¶9. (C) Hyundai Asan General Manager Byun Ha-jung said that 
there is emerging competition between various DPRK entities 
to control the revenue streams, but he would not elaborate on 
that.  He added that money from wages and tips (officially 
forbidden but given in practice) was raising living standards 
in the area, although he had not been able to visit DPRK 
employees at their living quarters.  Byun, formerly the 
manager of Mt. Kumgang's duty free store, said that a North 
Korean official on site once approached him asking for 
details about the store's daily turnover, implying that more 
senior DPRK officials wanted to know. 
 
------------------ 
HYUNDAI ASAN NORMS 
------------------ 
 
¶10. (C) Like the KIC in the west, Mt. Kumgang owes its tidy 
atmosphere to Hyundai Asan, whose founder, Chung Ju-yung, was 
born in North Korea (near Mt. Kumgang) and essentially 
launched inter-Korean engagement policy based on his personal 
convictions.  The resort areas are efficiently managed by 
pinstriped Hyundai Asan employees carrying walkie-talkies, 
with no visible sign of a DPRK management presence, though 
1400 out of 2700 employees are now DPRK citizens.  For 
example, when the Mt. Kumgang hotel, which gets electricity 
from the DPRK power grid, had no electricity on the evening 
that the group of diplomats arrived, Hyundai Asan managers 
quickly found a way to run its power from one of their 
generators.  The DPRK employees that Hyundai Asan hires are 
apparently all university graduates from Pyongyang.  The 
young hiking guides our group interacted with were cheerful 
and dressed like the ROK tourists in gore-tex and fleece. 
But they quickly stepped in when we tried to take a picture 
of a mosaic of Kim Il-sung and Kim Jong-il, insisting that 
only they knew "the best way to show the Dear Leader." 
During an earlier visit to Mt. Kumgang accompanying a 
Congressional Delegation, Poloffs found that guides were 
eager to talk about U.S. policy toward North Korea and latest 
developments in the Six-Party Talks. 
 
¶11. (C) Hyundai Asan also engages in diplomatic outreach. 
After August floods struck the DPRK, the company provided 740 
tons of relief goods to the local area.  It was Hyundai 
Asan's patient diplomacy, MOU DG Um told us, that led to the 
DPRK removing the many armed checkpoints that tourists first 
had to pass through to get to Mt. Kumgang sites; the company 
reached agreement for one checkpoint to be removed every six 
months (probably in exchange for some payment).  Hyundai Asan 
Chairman Yoon Man-joon, who was at Mt. Kumgang on October 13 
for the dedication of rebuilt Buddhist shrine, told the group 
of diplomats that he expected Mt. Kumgang's business to be 
more stable in the future, alluding to its past financial and 
political difficulties (such as the USD 70 million that it 
borrowed from the ROKG's National Tourism Organization in 
2001). 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶12. (C) ROK capital is making inroads into North Korea, 
gradually increasing the ROK's footprint in the area.  Some 
South Koreans envision the Mt. Kumgang project as the 
beginning of a slow upward crawl of a &peace zone8 along 
the east coast of the peninsula, to mirror the proposed 
&West Sea Peace Zone8 running along the west coast from the 
Kaesong Industrial Complex to Haeju.  While this plan is 
ambitious, Hyundai Asan has already made considerable 
headway.  An increasing number of South Koreans crossing the 
DMZ (marked with a very light line on Hyundai Asan's graphic 
map of the area) and seeing one corner of the DPRK is a 
worthwhile trend, and DPRK authorities getting used to 
collecting hard currency through tourism may also be a trend 
in the right direction.  Commenting on Mt. Kumgang's role in 
inter-Korean relations, MOU DG for Korean Unification Policy 
Planning Um said that the South Korean public should not be 
too concerned about the DPRK objecting to the words 
"openness" and "reform" (an issue at the October 2-4 ROK-DPRK 
leaders' summit) because it was clear that the DPRK wanted 
more "sweet poison," i.e., money. 
VERSHBOW
</file>