====== 제 목 : 한덕수 총리 취임 ======

작성일 : 2007년 4월 3일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000974 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KS PINR
SUBJECT: HAN DUCK-SOO SWORN IN AS ROK PM 

REF: SEOUL 705 

Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Yun. Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 

요약: 노대통령은 4월 2일 한덕수 총리의 국회 인준이 순조롭게 진행된 뒤 4월 3일 한덕수를 총리로 임명했다. 국회 인준은 역사적인 한미 FTA에 대한 결론이 내려진 지 수시간 만에 처리됐다. 한총리는 한미 FTA 합의를 성공적으로 결말짓는데 중심적 역할을 했다. 그는 한미 FTA 촉진대통령위원회 위원장이었다. 그는 또 지난주 협상에서 마지막 세세한 부분을 타결하는데 결정적인 역할을 했다. 한의 총리 임명은 그의 뛰어난 이력과 노대통령에 대한 충성에 대한 보답으로 널리 인식되고 있다. 게다가 대부분의 사람들은 그가 국회 인준까지 FTA 문제를 끌고 나가는데 적합한 사람이라는데 동의한다. 인준 청문회에서 찬성 210, 반대 51의 압도적 표차로 통과된 그는 이제 인준을 받기 위해 국회의 선의를 활용하려 할 것이다. 한은 또 한국인들에게 가능한 많이 그리고 가능한 투명하게 FTA에 대해 설명하려고 노력할 것이다. 하버드에서 공부한 한은 오랜 동안 경제 자유화, 자유 무역, 규제 철폐 등을 옹호해왔다 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: President Roh swore in Han Duck-soo as Prime 
Minister on April 3 after Han's confirmation sailed through 
the National Assembly on April 2, just hours after the 
conclusion of the historic KORUS FTA. Han played a central 
role in the successful conclusion of the KORUS FTA agreement, 
serving as Chairman of the Presidential Committee on 
Facilitating KORUS FTA. He also played a crucial role 
hammering out the final details of the agreement over the 
last weekend of negotiations. Han's promotion is seen widely 
as a reward for his distinguished career and loyalty to 
President Roh. Additionally, most agree he is the right 
person to guide the FTA through the ratification process. 
After an overwhelming 210-51 vote in his favor at his 
confirmation hearings, Han will now try to capitalize on good 
will in the Assembly to push the agreement toward 
ratification. Han also will work to explain the FTA as much 
and as transparently as possible to the Korean people. Han, 
educated at Harvard, has been a long-time advocate of 
economic liberalization, free trade and deregulation. END 
SUMMARY. 
.
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
배경

전라북도 출신인 한덕수는 2005~2006년 부총리로 일했으며 이 시기에 한 달 동안 총리 대행을 지내기도 했다. 그가 지명됐을 때, 상당수 전문가들은 한을 선택한 것은 그가 전라북도 출신이기 때문이라고 말했다. 또 일부에서는 한미 FTA와 밀접한 관계를 이유로 이런 선택을 반대했다. 그러나 그의 인준 과정은 놀라울 정도로 매끄러웠다. 많은 사람들이 이는 많은 한국인들이 FTA를 고통스럽지만 궁극적으로 필요한 것으로 보기 때문이라는 사실을 반영하는 것으로 짐작하고 있다. 몇몇 최근의 여론조사는 최고 70%가 FTA를 지지하고 있음을 보여준다. 몇몇 전문가들은 한이 FTA 합의를 촉진하기 위해 꾸준히 노력을 기울인 데 대한 지지도 일정 부분 역할을 한 것으로 생각한다. 한이 정치적으로 무색무취하고 뛰어난 명성을 가진 것도 노대통령의 선택을 쉽게 만들었다. 노가 “동지”들 혹은 최소한 정치적으로 “진보적인” 노의 철학에 좀 더 맞는 사람들과만 일한다고 예상했던 사람들에게 노가 한을 그의 마지막 총리도 택한 것은 놀라움을 안겨주었다. 
¶2. (C) Han, who hails from North Jeolla Province, served as 
Deputy Prime Minister from 2005-2006 and, during that time, 
was Acting Prime Minister for one month. At the time of his 
nomination, some pundits noted Han's selection was due to his 
North Jeolla background and some protested the choice due to 
Han's close ties to the KORUS FTA, but his confirmation 
process was surprisingly smooth. Many speculate this 
reflects the fact many Koreans see the FTA as potentially 
painful but ultimately necessary. Some recent polls show as 
high as 70 percent support for the KORUS FTA. Some experts 
attribute some of this support to Han's sustained efforts to 
promote the agreement. Han's lack of political affiliation 
and excellent reputation made Roh's choice an easy one and 
surprised many who expected Roh to go with a "crony" or at 
least someone more politically wed to the core "progressive" 
Roh philosophy to be his last Prime Minister. 


-------------------- 
HAN'S PLAN OF ACTION 
-------------------- 
한덕수의 실행 계획
총리로서 그의 첫 장관회의에서 한은 그는 노정부의 주요 철학이 (1) 인간 존중 (2) 균형 개발이라는 것을 이해하고 있다고 말했다. 그는 이런 가치를 실현하기 위해 최선을 다할 것을 다짐했다. 그는 취임사에서 한미FTA에서 가장 큰 영향을 받을 것으로 생각되는 농업과 같은 부문에 대해 포괄적인 보상조치를 마련하겠다는 그의 의향을 드러냈다. 다른 경제 문제들에 대해서는 한은 “경제 부흥에 초점을 맞추고 중소기업을 도움으로써 일자리를 창출”하겠으며, “새 행정도시 프로젝트를 계속해 나가겠다”고 말했다. FTA와 경제에 덧붙여 한은 “나는 공정하고 투명한 선거를 보장하기 위해 최선을 다할 것”이고, “정부 관리들에 의한 불법적 선거 관여를 절대로 용납하지 않을 것”이라고 말했다.
¶3. (SBU) In his first Cabinet meeting as PM, Han said he 
understood the main tenets of the Roh Administration were (1) 
respect for human beings and (2) balanced development. Han 
pledged he would do his best to realize these values. In his 
inaugural address, Han laid out his intentions to, "come up 
with comprehensive compensatory measures for sectors such as 
agriculture most likely affected by the KORUS FTA." On other 
economic issues, Han said he would, "focus on economic 
revival, promote job creation by promoting small and medium 
sized businesses," and "follow through with the new 
administrative city project." In addition to the FTA and the 
economy, Han said, "I will do my best to ensure a fair and 
transparent election" and "will never tolerate illegal 
election intervention by government officials." 


COMMENT 
------- 
코멘트

4월 2일 성공적인 한미 FTA 종결은 단지 시작일 뿐이다. 국회 비준에는 엄청난 정치적 다툼이 있을 것이다. 이는 2008년까지 계속될 수도 있다. 대통령 선거가 있는 올해, 한덕수는 그의 역할을 스스로 한정 지었다.—한미 FTA를 계속해 옹호하고, 레임덕 행정부를 관리해 나가며 깨끗한 선거를 치르도록 모색하는 것이다. 인기도가 갑작스럽게 일시적으로 상승하고 있지만(몇몇 여론조사에는 24%까지), 노는 그의 정책에 대한 광범위한 반대에 부딪히고 있다. 몇몇 정치 전문가들에 따르면, 다른 긴박한 문제들과 함께 노 행정부가 에너지를 FTA 통과에만 쏟아 붓는 것은 가능하지 않을 것이다. 남은 10개월 동안 그가 풀어야 할 다른 긴박한 안건들은—북한, 헌법 개정, 부동산 개혁 등등이다. 이들 정치 분석가들은 FTA는 2008년 6월 국회까지 밀려날 수 있으며, 이 때문에 노가 북한과 12월 대통령 선거에 집중할 수 있을 것이라는 입장을 나타냈다. 

¶4. (C) The conclusion of a successful KORUS FTA agreement on 
April 2 was just the beginning. There will now be an 
enormous political struggle to ratify the agreement in the 
Korean National Assembly, which could last well into 2008. 
In this presidential election year Han has his work cut out 
for him - in addition to continuing to advocate for the KORUS 
FTA, he must attempt to manage the lame-duck Roh 
administration and seek to manage a clean election. Roh, 
while currently enjoying a temporary surge in popularity (up 
to 24 percent support in some polls), still faces wide-spread 
opposition to his policies. According to some pundits, it 
will not be possible for the Roh administration to focus 
energies on passing the FTA with so many other pressing 
issues still to be resolved in his remaining 10 months in 
office - North Korea, Constitutional revision, real estate 
reform, etc. These pundits posit that the FTA will get 
pushed to the next Assembly in June, 2008, allowing Roh to 
focus on North Korea and December's presidential elections. 
VERSHBOW 
