^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  07SEOUL2269  |  2007-07-27 08:04  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PREL KS }}  |

====== 제 목: 한국 유권자들의 종교적 열정 ======
미분류 SEOUL 002269 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
 
행정명령 12958: 해당없음((N/A))
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 한국 유권자들의 종교적 열정
재교: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2013/09/03 14:36//
===== 요점 =====
1. (민감하지만 미분류) 종교가 12월 한국 대선에서 영향력 있는 요인으로 부상하고 있다. 보수와 진보 성향 종교단체 모두 성향이 비슷한 단체끼리 교섭 창구를 만들어 논란이 되는 쟁점을 놓고서 각자의 입지를 강화하고 있다. 특히 보수 개신교 집단은 야당인 한나라당과 그 후보자에게 지지의 목소리를 높이고 있다. 대선 예비 후보들이 종교 행사에 참석하여 신자들의 지지를 규합하려고 애를 쓰는 상황에서 후보자들의 신앙에 세간의 이목이 쏠리고 있다. 특히 독실한 개신교인인 선두주자 이명박은 개신교도들의 지지를 모았지만, 대다수 불자는 경계하고 있다. //요약 끝.// 

===== 종교 단체: 정치적 영향력 확대 =====

2. (미분류) 12월 한국 대선에서 종교가 영향력 있는 요인으로 부상하고 있다. 12월 15일 국민일보의 개신교인 대상 설문조사에서 응답자의 64.7퍼센트가 대통령 후보자가 기독교인이냐 아니냐가 중요한 판단 기준이라고 답했다. 또한, 응답자 중 50.2퍼센트가 과거 선거에서 개신교도라서 특정 후보에게 표를 던졌다고 응답했다. 다가오는 선거에 개신교 대통령 후보가 나올 경우 개신교 후보에게 투표하겠다고 응답한 비율은 61.5퍼센트였다. 한편 응답자 중 89.7퍼센트는 왕성한 정치 활동을 보이는 개신교 지도자들이 늘어나는 현상을 긍정적으로 받아들였다.

3. (미분류) 선거에서 종교가 중요한 요인인가를 두고서는 전문가들 사이에 의견이 갈라져 있지만, 정치계에서 종교 단체와 그 지도자의 역할이 상당히 높아지고 있다는 점을 놓고는 목소리를 같이 하고 있다. 기독교 내 진보/보수 진영 모두 쟁점에 대해 목소리를 높이는 가운데 해당 정치권을 대상으로 자신들의 신앙을 투영하고 있는 민간단체와 손을 잡고서 논란을 사는 현안에 대해 그들의 목소리를 내면서 정치 무대에서 만만찮은 세력으로 등장하였다. 예를 들어 보수 개신교 협의체인 한국기독교총연합회는(이하 한기총) 뉴라이트라는 민간단체와 공조하여 대북정책과 한미동맹, 사학법 개정 등의 사안을 놓고서 한나라당에 힘을 실어주고 있다. (주석: 보수단체들은 2004년 총선에서 한나라당이 패배한 이후 이른바 구 우익을 대체하는 차원에서 //“뉴라이트”//라는 간판을 달고 등장하였다. 주석 끝.)

4. (미분류) 대선 예비후보들도 종교사회의 입맛에 맞추어 지지를 호소하고 있다. 2004년에 서울시를 하나님께 봉헌한다는 말을 꺼내 비기독교인에게 심한 반발을 불러일으킨 적이 있는 보수 한나라당의 대권 선두 주자 이명박은 개신교 단체의 지지를 힘써 재확인하는 한편 불교 신자들의 지지를 모으기 위해 총력을 기울이고 있다. (주석: 2006년 통계청 통계에 보면 총인구 중 불교도는 22.8퍼센트, 개신교 18.3퍼센트, 가톨릭교도는 10.9퍼센트로 나왔다). 대다수 선두권 대선 예비후보들, 특히 한나라당의 이명박과 박근혜 그리고 진보 진영의 정동영과 손학규 후보는 5월 24일 석가탄신일에 한국 최대 사찰인 조계사에 모습을 보였다. 이명박과 박근혜, 그리고 손학규 후보는 3만 명이 참석한 개신교 부활절 예배에도 얼굴을 보였다.

5. (미분류) 덧붙여서 보수와 진보 양 진영은 민간단체와 종교 지도자들을 선거 캠프에 포섭하거나 정치 행사에 '원로'로 초빙하고 있다. 7월 19일 한나라당 대선 후보 청문회에는 인명진 목사와 보광 스님이 심사 원단으로 참여하여 한나라당 유력 대선후보 2인의 과거를 집요하게 물고 늘어졌다. 7월 4일에는 박형규 목사와 김병상 신부가 진보 진영의 단일 후보 선출을 위한 첫 연석회의에 참가하기도 했다.

===== 보수 개신교도, 정치에 가장 적극적 =====  

6. (미분류) 한국의 종교 단체 중에서 보수 개신교 집단이 가장 적극적으로 정치적 역할을 모색하고 있다. 불교나 가톨릭 등 다른 종교단체는 다가오는 선거에서 특정 후보나 정당에 대한 공개적 지지를 유보하는 데 비해 일부 개신교 단체는 거리낌 없이 공개 지지를 보내고 있다. 6월 21일 보수 개신교 단체인 //“한국기독교개혁운동”//은 이명박 후보를 대통령으로 지지한다고 공식 발표했다. <wrap hi>한기총 총무 최희범 목사는 한나라당 후보 지지를 위한 한기총의 선거법 회피 계획과 방안에 대해 \\ \\ //국방부망 배포// \\ 미 대사관에 알려 주었다.</wrap> 예를 들면 기독교 부흥회를 열어서 참석자들이 특정 후보를 언급하지 않고서도 //“누구를 위해 기도하는지”// 충분히 이해가 가도록 하는 것이다. 현행 대한민국 선거법은 대통령 선거일 이전 23일간의 //“공식 선거운동 기간”// 이전에 선거 운동을 하는 걸 금지하고 있다.

7. (미분류) 일부 종교 단체는 2000년 총선에서 진보 성향 민간단체들이 보여준 //“낙선 운동”//을 흉내 자기들의 입지를 이용하여 공직자 선출에 영향력을 행사하기로 하였다. 2000년 당시 463개 민간단체가 연합하여 국회의원 “부적격” 후보 목록을 작성하여 낙선 운동을 펼쳤다. 1개월 전 한기총은 2008년 총선에서 그와 비슷한 역할을 하고 싶다는 신호를 보내며 사학법 재개정에 반대한 점을 들어 국회의원 후보로 부적합하다고 보는 의원 5명을 //“낙선 대상자”//로 선정했다고 발표하였다. 다섯 명의 의원 중에는 현 대한민국 대통령 노무현의 후원을 받는다는 말이 돌고 있는 진보진영 대선 유력후보 이해찬이 들어 있다.

8. (미분류) 기독교 진보 단체들은 난립한 진보 진영 후보군 중에서 한 후보를 지지 선언하는 일이 남긴 했지만, 기독교 보수/진보 단체들 모두 유사한 정치적 신념을 지닌 민간단체들과 손을 잡았다. 남한 대선일이 불과 5개월 앞으로 다가온 가운데 두 진영 모두 대여섯 개의 대규모 포럼으로 재정비하였다. 2007년 7월 10일 보수 정책 홍보 차원에서 9월에서 11월에 걸쳐 전국 순회 행사에 나설 90개 보수 민간단체 연합체인 //“대한민국 선진화 전진대회”//의 하나로 기독교 보수 단체 20곳이 //“선진화기독교연합”//를 결성하였다. 7월 2일 진보 성향 목회자 70명이 22개 진보 민간단체 연합인 //“한국진보연대”//를 설립하기 위해 //“기독교준비위원회”//를((번역 주: 목사들로 구성된 “준비위원회”의 성격을 나타내기 위해 미 대사관이 붙인 명칭으로 보인다. 틀릴 수도 있다)) 출범시켰다.

9. (미분류) 개신교인 누구나 이런 추세를 바람직하다고 보는 것은 아니지만, 이를 지지하는 개신교인들이 늘고 있다. 2007년 5월 한국기독교목회자협의회(이하 한목협)가 개신교도 1,500명을 대상으로 한 조사 결과 응답자 중 59.5퍼센트가 교회의 정치 참여를 지지한다고 답했다. 이는 2007년 2월 실시한 동일 조사에서 나온 42.7퍼센트에 비해 급증한 수치이다. 한편 이 추세에 부정적으로 응답한 이의 비율은 52퍼센트에서 37.5퍼센트로 떨어졌다.<WRAP right round box 30%>//**부산 평양대부흥 100주년 기념 이명박 장로의 비디오 연설**//"사찰을 무너지게 해 주시옵소서? 주여!" "범어사와 무당과 점집과...술과 음란문화와 조폭들을 사라지게 해 주시옵소서, 주여!"[[http://youtu.be/qQdrnROLXUY|2006년 6월 4일 부산 월드컵경기장에서 열렸던 평양대부흥 100주년 기념 집회 동영상(이명박 장로!)]]</WRAP>
===== 대선 유력주자들의 종교 현황 =====

10. (미분류) 이명박은 서울의 대표적인 부자 동네인 압구정동 소재 소망 교회의 장로로써 독실한 개신교 신자이다. 정치 관측통들에 따르면 2004년 5월 30일 서울 장충체육관에서 열린 청년·학생 연합기도회에서 이명박이 //'수도서울 봉헌'// 발언을 한 것은 수도를 충청도로 이전한다는 정부의 계획을 막기 위해 기독교의 지지를 모으려는 노골적인 행보였다. 불교 단체들은 격하게 반발하며 종교 행사에서 정치적 발언을 했다고 이 시장을 비난하였다. 이명박은 나중에 이를 무마하는 차원에서 //“봉헌”//을 액면 그대로 받아들이지 말라고 변명했지만 불교 신자들은 여전히 의혹의 눈을 거두지 않고 있다. 한국 불교 조계종 총무원 기획홍보팀장 김판동은 이 시장이 //“타 종교에 대해 배타적 태도”//를 보이는 점을 불교계가 우려하고 있다”고 밝혔다. 이명박에 대한 불교계의 우려는 2006년 6월 부산에 모인 <wrap hi>기독교 단체 참석자들이 //"사찰을 무너지게 해 주시옵소서, 주여!"//라고 기원했다고 알려진 평양대부흥 100주년 기념 성회에서 이명박이 비디오 연설을 한 일을</wrap> 두고 또 다른 논쟁을 낳았다.

11. (미분류) 2007년 5월 //“기형아나 장애아 출산 같은 경우 낙태는 불가피하다.”//라는 이명박의 발언에 일부 천주교 신자들 역시 질색을 하였다. 하지만 이명박은 개신교인들 사이에 여전히 탄탄한 지지를 받고 있다. 한국 일간 신문 문화일보의 5월 23자 여론조사에 따르면 조사에 응한 개신교인 중 53.8퍼센트가 이명박을 지지하였다. <wrap hi>대사관 경제 직원과의 회동에서 최희범 한기총 총무는 우리 단체는 이명박을 “선호한다”고 밝히고 대선 후보 선출 이후 이명박 지지 운동을 벌일 뜻을 비쳤다.</wrap> 한편 이명박은 열렬한 선교 활동 때문에 초기에 얼마간 인질들에 대한 비판이 따랐지만, 7월 23일 아프가니스탄 한국 피랍자 23명의 가정을 방문하여 개신교계의 지지를 계속 규합하고 있다.

12. (미분류) 무신론자라는 평판을 얻고 있긴 하지만 박근혜는 불교 신자들 사이에 인기를 얻고 있다. 하지만 그녀가 젊었을 때 가톨릭과 불교 신자였던 것으로 알려졌다. 언론 보도에 따르면 대학 시절 “율리아나”라는 세례명을 받았고 2005년에는 법명도 얻었다. 한국 불교 조계종 기획조정실 차장 박희승은 나이 많은 여성들이 주축을 이루는 독실한 한국 불교 신자들은 이명박보다 박근혜를 선호한다고 밝힌다. 한국 불교 조계종의 김판동은 전 대통령 박정희의 부인이자 박근혜의 어머니인 육영수 씨가 독실한 불교 신자였으며 차분한 영부인으로 한국인들 사이에 인기가 무척 높았다는 점이 박근혜의 인기에 보탬이 된다고 풀이한다.

13. (미분류) 선거 운동에서 강조하지는 않지만, 일부 진보진영 후보자들은 젊은 시절 학생 운동권으로 진보적이고 다소 급진적인 기독교 단체에 몸을 담았다. 진보진영의 선두주자 손학규는 진보 성향의 개신교 단체인 한국기독교교회협의회(이하 한기협)의 인권운동 간사로 활동하였다. 손학규는 개신교 단체인 세계교회협의회의 자금 지원을 받아 영국 옥스포드 대학교에서 대학원 과정을 마쳤다. 하지만 손학규의 보좌진들은 그가 불교 지도자들과 친밀한 관계라는 점을 강조하고 있다. 한편 한기협 또한 이해찬과의 관계를 자랑하고 있다. 한기협 총무 김태현은 우리와 만난 자리에서 \\ \\ 국방부망 배포 \\ 이해찬은 한기협과 오랜 연고를 맺고 있고, 우리와 자리를 마친 후 그가 한기협을 방문하여 지도부와 사적인 만남을 가질 것이라고 밝혔다. 하지만 그 방문은 외부에 알려지지 않았다. 한명숙 전 국무총리는 한국 크리스천 아카데미 여성사회 간사로 재직 중인 1979년 민주화 운동에 뛰어들어 투옥된 경력이 있는 독실한 개신교도이다. \\ \\ 국방부망 배포 \\ 
14. (미분류) 지금까지 정동영은 유일한 천주교도 대선 예비후보이다. 하지만 한국 천주교 주교회의사무처장인 배영호 신부에 의하면 정동영은 천주교 교우들에게서 특별한 지지를 받고 있지 않다고 한다. 배 신부는 김대중 전 대통령과 노무현 전 대통령 그리고 1997년과 2002년 한나라당 대선후보 이회창 등 천주교 정치인들에게 지나친 실망을 맛보아 새 후보라고 별다르겠느냐는 투로 언급하였다.
===== 논평 =====

15. (민감하지만 미분류) 한국인들은 종교에 대해 친근감을 보이는 편이고 여러 종교 공동체가 심각한 갈등 없이 공존해오고 있다. 개신교도들의 전도 열정이 가장 강하기 때문에 개신교의 교세가 가장 빠르게 증가하는 것도 놀랄 일은 아니다. 개신교도들이 정치적 활동에 대한 강한 취향도 놀랄 일이 아니다. 이 현상은 보수/진보 개신교 세력 망라한 사실이다. 조사 결과 개신교도들은 신앙을 토대로 후보자에게 투표하는 비율이 놀랄 만치 높고 교회의 정치 참여를 지지하는 비율이 늘고 있는 것으로 나타났다. 이 점이 서울시장 이명박이 높은 인기를 누리는 배경 중 하나이다.

16. (미분류) 이 보고서는 대사관 인턴 클라라 성이 초안을 작성하였다.
스탠튼
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/7/07seoul2269|위키리크스 번역]] (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== '사찰이 무너지게 하옵소서, 주여!' 기독교 행사에 비디오 축사보내는 이명박 장로 =====
{{youtube>qQdrnROLXUY?large}}
===== 바깥 고리 =====
  - [[http://www.ecumenian.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=3472|"대선에서도 승리할 수 있도록 기도해 달라" ]] //에큐메니안//
  - [[http://www.ohmynews.com/NWS_Web/View/at_pg.aspx?CNTN_CD=A0000195244|이명박 시장 "수도 서울을 하나님께 봉헌"]] //오마이뉴스//

===== 원문 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07SEOUL2269.rtf>
UNCLAS SEOUL 002269 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KS
SUBJECT: RELIGIOUS FERVOR AMONG KOREAN VOTERS 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Religion is emerging as an influencing factor in the 
December South Korean presidential election.  Both liberal 
and conservative religious groups have formed liaisons with 
like-minded NGOs, bolstering each side's position on 
controversial issues.  In particular, conservative Protestant 
groups have been vocal about their support for the opposition 
Grand National Party (GNP) and its candidates.  As 
presidential hopefuls try to rally support among the 
religious population by attending religious events, their own 
religious beliefs have been thrust into the spotlight. 
Notably, frontrunner Lee Myung-bak's devout belief in 
Christianity has garnered support from Protestants while most 
Buddhists remain wary.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
RELIGIOUS GROUPS: INCREASING POLITICAL CLOUT 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Religion is emerging as an influencing factor in the 
December South Korean presidential election.  In a survey of 
the Protestant population by a Korean Daily, Kookmin Ilbo, on 
February 15, 64.7 percent of the surveyed said that whether 
the presidential candidate is Protestant or not is an 
important criterion.  Of those surveyed, 50.2 percent 
responded that in past elections they have voted for certain 
candidates because they were fellow Protestants.  Supposing 
that there would be a Protestant candidate for the upcoming 
election, 61.5 percent said they would vote for the 
Protestant candidate.  Meanwhile, 89.7 percent of the 
respondents saw it in a positive light that an increasing 
number of Protestant leaders have become politically active. 
 
¶3. (U) While pundits' opinions are divided on whether or not 
religion is a significant factor in the election, they all 
agree that the role of religious groups and leaders has grown 
significantly in the political sphere.  Both liberal and 
conservative Christian groups joined forces with NGOs 
mirroring their beliefs on the political spectrum, and 
emerged as formidable actors on the political scene as they 
raised their voices about controversial issues.  For 
instance, the Christian Council of Korea (CCK), a 
conservative Protestant churches' group, has aligned with the 
"New Right" NGOs and rallied support for the GNP's position 
on issues such as the revision of the Private School Law, 
U.S.- ROK alliance and North Korea policy.  (Note: 
conservative organizations began to emerge as the "New 
Rights" aiming to replace the so-called "Old right force" 
after GNP's failure in the 2004 National Assembly election. 
End Note.) 
 
¶4. (U) Presidential hopefuls have also been trying to cater 
to the religious communities for support.  After experiencing 
a severe backlash from non-Christians because of his 2004 
remark "devot(ing) Seoul to God," the leading candidate from 
the conservative Grand National Party (GNP), Lee Myung-bak, 
has been trying to garner support from Buddhists while trying 
to reaffirm the support from the Protestant community. 
(Note: According to statistics released by the Korean 
National Statistical Office in May, 2006, 22.8 percent of the 
total population identified themselves as Buddhists; 18.3 
percent as Protestants, and 10.9 percent as Catholics. End 
Note.)  Most of the leading presidential hopefuls -- notably 
Lee and Park Geun-hye from the GNP, and Sohn Hak-kyu and 
Chung Dong-young from the liberal side -- showed up at the 
celebration of Buddha's birthday on May 24 at Jogye-sa, the 
largest temple in South Korea.  Lee, Park and Sohn also 
showed up at the Protestant service on Easter, attended by 
30,000 people. 
 
¶5. (U) In addition, both the conservative and liberal sides 
have been recruiting religious leaders and NGOs into their 
camp or inviting them to preside as the "elders" at their 
political events.  At the GNP verification hearing on July 
19, Pastor In Myung-jin and the Venerable Bokwang were on the 
panel, grilling the two GNP frontrunners about their past. 
On July 4, Pastor Park Hyung-kyu and Father Kim Byung-sang 
participated in the first meeting of the liberal presidential 
hopefuls at which they agreed to hold a joint primary and 
field a sole liberal candidate. 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
CONSERVATIVE PROTESTANTS MOST ACTIVE IN POLITICS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6. (U) Among all religious groups in Korea, conservative 
Protestant groups are the most active in pursuing a role in 
politics.  While other religious communities, such as 
Buddhist and Catholic groups, hold back from endorsing a 
specific candidate or party for the upcoming election, some 
Protestant groups have had no qualms about doing so.  On June 
21, "Korea Christian Reform Movement," a conservative 
Protestant organization, announced their official endorsement 
of Lee Myung-bak for president.  Choi Hee Boum, Executive 
Secretary of CCK, informed the Embassy of CCK's "plans and 
 
SIPDIS 
ways to get around the election law to support the GNP 
candidate."  For example, they would have Christian revivals 
where participants would not mention any specific candidates, 
but would have "a deep understanding of whom they are praying 
for," he said.  Current Korean election law bans campaigning 
before the "official campaigning period" which lasts for just 
the 23 days prior to the presidential election. 
 
¶7. (U) Some religious groups decided to use their position to 
influence who would be elected to public office, mimicking 
the progressive NGOs' "Rejection Campaign" in the 2000 
National Assembly elections.  In 2000, a coalition of 463 
NGOs compiled a list of candidates "unqualified" for seats in 
the National Assembly and campaigned against them.  Signaling 
that they want to play a similar role in the 2008 National 
Assembly elections, a month ago CCK announced their selection 
of five parliamentarians to "reject," those who CCK viewed as 
unqualified candidates for the National Assembly because they 
opposed re-revision of the Private School Law.  Among the 
five was Lee Hae-chan, a liberal presidential hopeful who is 
rumored to be backed by the current South Korean president 
Roh Moo-hyun. 
 
¶8. (U) While liberal Christian groups have yet to endorse a 
candidate among the disarray in the liberal side, both 
progressive and conservative Christian groups joined forces 
with NGOs with similar political beliefs.  With the South 
Korean presidential election only five months away, both 
sides reorganized themselves into several large forums.  On 
July 10, 2007, 20 conservative Christian groups formed the 
"Christian Union for Development," as a part of the 
"Pan-National Movement for Development," a coalition of 90 
conservative NGOs which will embark on a nationwide tour from 
September to November to promote conservative policies.  On 
July 2, 70 politically liberal pastors launched the 
"Christian Initiative Committee" to establish the "Korean 
Progressive Solidarity," an alliance of 22 liberal NGOs. 
 
¶9. (U) While not all Protestants view this trend in a 
positive light, an increasing number of Protestants support 
it.  In a survey of 1,500 Protestants by Korean National 
Association of Christian Pastors (KACP) in May 2007, 59.5 
percent responded they support churches' participation in 
politics.  This is a jump from 42.7 percent of support rate 
from the same survey in February 2007.  Meanwhile, the 
percentage of those surveyed who responded negatively toward 
this trend decreased from 52 percent to 37.5 percent. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
RELIGIOUS PROFILES OF THE PRESIDENTIAL HOPEFULS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶10. (U) Lee Myung-bak is a devout Protestant and an "Elder" 
at Somang Church in Apgujeong-dong, an affluent neighborhood 
in Seoul.  According to political observers, his declaration 
that he would "devote Seoul to God" at a Christian prayer 
service in a Seoul gymnasium on May 30, 2004, was an apparent 
move to rally support from Christians in Seoul against the 
government's plan to move the capital to Chungchong Province. 
 Buddhist groups lashed out at Lee, condemning the Mayor for 
making political remarks at a religious event.  In an effort 
to defend himself, he explained later that the word "devote" 
was not meant literally, but Buddhists still remain wary of 
Lee.  Kim Pan-dong, Planning & Public Relations Team leader 
at Jogye Order of Korean Buddhism, said the Buddhist 
community is worried about Lee's "exclusive attitude toward 
other religions."  Their concern about Lee resulted in 
another controversy when Lee made a speech via video at a 
gathering of Christian groups' in Busan in June 2006 at which 
the participants reportedly prayed for the "destruction of 
Buddhist temples in Busan." 
 
¶11. (U) Some Catholics were also irked by Lee Myung-bak's 
comment that "abortion may be inevitable in some cases such 
as deformity or disability" on May 12 2007.  Among 
Protestants, however, Lee continues to receive strong 
support.  According to the May 23 survey by Munhwa Ilbo, a 
Korean daily, 53.8 percent of the Protestants surveyed 
supported Lee. In a meeting with emboffs, Choi Hee Boum, 
Executive Secretary of CCK, stated that the group "prefers" 
Lee Myung-bak and implied that they will launch a campaign 
for him after the primary.  Meanwhile, Lee continued his 
rally for support from the Protestant community by visiting 
the families of the 23 South Korean hostages in Afghanistan 
on July 23, despite some early criticism toward the hostages 
for their fervent missionary work. 
 
¶12. (U) Park Geun-hye is popular among Buddhists although she 
is reputed to be an atheist.  When she was younger, however, 
she reportedly practiced Catholicism and Buddhism; she was 
baptized as "Juliana" in her college days and also received a 
Buddhist name in 2005, according to press.  Devout Korean 
Buddhists are predominantly made up of older females who 
prefer Park over Lee, says Park Hui-seung, Assistant Deputy 
Director of Planning and Coordination at Jogye Order of 
Korean Buddhism.  It helps her popularity that her mother Yuk 
Young-soo, wife of former President Park Chung-hee, was a 
devout Buddhist and very popular among Koreans for her image 
of a serene First Lady, explains Kim Pan-dong at Jogye Order 
of Korean Buddhism. 
 
¶13. (U) Several liberal candidates have associated with 
liberal, some radical, Christian organizations in their 
younger days as student activists although they do not 
emphasize this in their election campaigns.  The frontrunner 
on the liberal side, Sohn Hak-kyu, worked as a Secretary for 
Human Rights at the liberal Protestant churches' group, 
National Council of Churches in Korea (KNCC), in the 1960s 
and 1970s.  Sohn's graduate studies at Oxford University in 
the United Kingdom were funded by a Protestant group, the 
World Council of Churches.  However, his aides currently 
emphasize Sohn's close relationship with Buddhist leaders. 
Meanwhile, KNCC also boasts a connection with Lee Hae-chan. 
During a meeting with us, Reverend Kim Tae-Hyon, Executive 
Secretary of KNCC, said that Lee Hae-chan has been KNCC's old 
 
SIPDIS 
contact and was coming to KNCC to pay a personal visit to the 
head of KNCC after our meeting.  The visit, however, was not 
publicized.  Han Myung-suk, the former Prime Minister, is a 
devout Protestant who was imprisoned for her participation in 
the democratization movement in 1979 during her tenure as the 
Secretary of the Korean Christian Academy. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶14. (U) So far, Chung Dong-young is the only Catholic 
presidential hopeful. However, he does not garner any special 
support from his fellow Catholics, according to Father Bae 
Young-ho, Secretary General of the Catholic Bishops' 
Conference of Korea (CBCK).  Father Bae remarked that 
Catholics have experienced too much disappointment with 
Catholic politicians -- such as former President Kim 
Dae-jung, President Roh and Lee Hoi-chang, the GNP 
presidential candidate in 1997 and 2002 -- to expect the new 
candidates to be any different. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Koreans tend to be affable toward religion, and 
different religious communities have coexisted without 
serious conflicts.  Protestants have the most missionary zeal 
and, therefore, it is not surprising that their numbers have 
increased at the fastest rate.  Also not surprising is their 
penchant for political activism.  This is true for both 
conservative and liberal Protestants.  Surveys show that a 
surprisingly high percentage of Protestants have voted for a 
candidate on the basis of their beliefs and increasingly 
support churches' participation in politics.  This is one 
factor behind former Seoul Mayor Lee Myung-bak's high 
popularity. 
 
¶16. (U) This report was drafted by Embassy intern Clara Suong. 
 
STANTON
</file>

