====== 제 목 : 백종천 통일외교안보정책실장 미국 방문 관련 사전 정보 ======

작성일 : 2007년 11월 30일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 003427 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

NSC FOR WILDER, FRASER, TONG 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/06/2017 
TAGS: KS KN PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR NSA BAEK'S TRIP TO WASHINGTON 


Classified By: Ambassador Alexander Vershbow. Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 

요약: 국가안보 보좌관 백종천은 12월 3~4일 그의 생각으로는 마지막이 될 미국 방문을 할 계획이다. 11월 28일 대사와 회동에서 그는 이번 방문의 주 목적은 노무현 대통령의 잔여 임기 동안 미국 한국 이슈들에 대해 조율하는 것이 될 것이라고 말했다. 한 예로 한국 정부의 이라크 대표부 설치 문제 등을 언급했다. 그러나 북한 문제는 우선 과제가 아니라고 언급했다. 하지만 그는 한국 전쟁의 종결을 선언하기 위한 4강 지도자 모임의 조기 개최 주장을 할 수도 있다고 말했다. 대사는 그러나 이 문제는 협상 카드에 들어가서는 안 된다는 입장을 분명히 했다. 이번 방문은 그 같은 생각을 접어두는 기회가 두어야 한다. 이라크와 아프가니스탄에서 계속 주둔하기로 한데 대한 노정부의 지원에 대해 백 보좌관에게 감사하고, 미국 의회가 한미 FTA를 조기에 다루도록 하기 위해서는 소고기 시장을 한국 정부가 여는 것이 중요하다. 

¶1. (C) SUMMARY: ROK National Security Advisor Baek 
Jong-chun will make what he sees as his final visit to 
Washington in his current position on December 3-4. In a 
November 28 meeting with the Ambassador, he said that the 
main reason for the trip was to coordinate on relevant 
U.S.-ROK issues for the remainder of President Roh Moo-hyun's 
term, mentioning the ROKG's Iraq presence as an example, and 
that North Korea issues were not the priority. However, he 
may also make a last-ditch argument for an early 
four-leaders' meeting to declare the end of the Korean War, 
despite the Ambassador's clear assurances that this is not in 
the cards. The visit provides an opportunity to put that 
idea to rest, to thank Baek for the Roh administration's 
support in Iraq and Afghanistan and urge its continuance, and 
to underline the importance of the ROK opening its beef 
market to allow Congress to consider the KORUS-FTA early in 
¶2008. END SUMMARY. 

------------------------------- 
KEY ISSUES FOR WASHINGTON VISIT 
------------------------------- 
워싱턴 방문에서 다룰 핵심 이슈들
12월 3~4일로 계획된 워싱턴 방문과 관련해 백 보좌관은 그의 방미 목적은 노정부의 잔여 임기 동안 미국-한국의 관련 문제들을 조율하는 것이라고 말했다. 그는 한국군의 파병 연장이 한 예가 될 것이라고 언급했다. 그리고 북한 문제는 우선 순위가 아니라고 말했다. 그러므로 이번 방문은 노무현정부 마지막 3개월 임기 동안 상호 관심사에 대한 노무현 정부의 긴밀한 협력을 모색하는 기회가 될 것이다. 

¶2. (C) Regarding his planned trip to Washington on December 
3-4, Baek said that his aim was to coordinate on relevant 
U.S.-ROK issues for the remainder of Roh's term, mentioning 
extension of the ROKG's troop dispatch as an example, and 
that North Korea issues were not the priority. Thus, the 
December 3-4 visit provides an opportunity to seek the Roh 
administration's close cooperation on issues of mutual 
interest during Roh's final three months in office. 


6자 회담: 경제 에너지 협력 그룹의 한국측 리더십은 전문적이다. 다른 나라들과 협력하는데도 꾸준히 관심을 두고 있고 그래서 감사를 표시하는 게 적절하다. 한국정부는 북한의 핵프로그램 완결 선언에 대해 우리와 같이 우려했다. 우라늄 문제와 해체를 달성하는 것의 중요성에 대한 우려도 마찬가지이다. 백은 부시 행정부가 6자 회담의 목표를 지지한다는 점에 대해서 확신을 가져야 한다. 북한을 테러 국가 명단에서 제외하고 평화 조약 협력을 시작하는 것도 이에 포함된다. 북한이 2단계 약속을 최대한 빨리 지키는 한에서 그렇다. 

¶3. (C) SIX-PARTY TALKS: ROKG leadership of the Economy and 
Energy Cooperation Working Group is professional, with 
sustained attention to communicating with other countries, so 
an expression of gratitude is appropriate. The ROKG shares 
our concerns about securing a complete DPRK declaration of 
its nuclear programs, including the uranium issue, and about 
the importance of getting on with dismantlement. Baek should 
be assured that the Bush Administration will uphold its end 
of the Six Party-related commitments -- including delisting 
the DPRK from the terrorism list and launching the peace 
treaty negotiations -- as soon as the DPRK fulfills all of 
its phase-two commitments. 

남북 관계: 10월 2~4일 남북 정상회담 이후 남북 관계는 과속했다. 총리 회담과 국방장관 회담, 북한 정보 총수이자 김정일의 측근인 김양온의 서울 방문, 세부적인 경제협력과 남한 정부 관리들의 전례 없는 현장 방문, 노무현 정부가 마무리되기 전에 추가 고위급 회담에 대한 소문들이 그런 것들이다. 과도한 움직임은 정치적으로 만들어진 것이지만(노무현의 업적을 빛나게 하고 차기 정부의 발을 묶어 두려는) 한국 정부는 우리가 쳐놓은 빨간줄을 넘지 않거나 혹은 6자 회담을 훼손하지 않도록 지금까지는 조심스럽게 움직였다. 우리는 북남 협력의 상당한 진전을 환영해야 한다. 그리고 남한이 북한과 회담들을 하는 것을 전면적인 비핵화의 중요성을 강조하는데 이용할 가치가 있다는 점을 백에게 상기시켜야 한다. 최근에 그랬던 것처럼 말이다. 우리는 동시에 남북 회담이 계속되면서 투명성과 상의도 계속될 필요가 있다는 점을 강조해야 한다. 6자 회담이 민감한 상태에 있는 국면에서 그렇다는 얘기이다. 
¶4. (C) INTER-KOREAN RELATIONS: Since the October 2-4 
South-North summit, inter-Korean relations have accelerated 
into overdrive, featuring Prime Minister and Defense Minister 
talks, a visit to Seoul from the DPRK's intel chief and Kim 
Jong-il confidant Kim Yang-on, detailed economic agreements 
and unprecedented site surveys by ROKG officials in the DPRK, 
and rumors of further senior meetings before Roh leaves 

office. While the hyperactivity is politically driven (to 
burnish Roh's legacy and lock in the next administration), 
the ROKs have thus far been careful not to cross any of our 
red lines or to undercut the Six-Party process. We should 
welcome the considerable progress in North-South cooperation 
and remind Baek of the value of the ROKG using its DPRK 
meetings to reiterate the importance of full 
denuclearization, as has been the case recently. We should 
also stress the need for continued transparency and 
consultation as inter-Korean talks proceed, with the 
Six-Party talks at a delicate state. 

소고기: 백의 방문은 안보 문제에 초점이 맞춰지겠지만, 그가 우리와 전체적인 외교 관계에 있어서 중요한 두 가지의 통상 이슈에 대해서도 귀를 기울이는 게 중요하다. 먼저 소고기 문제이다. 미국 의회가 FTA 비준을 하도록 지지를 구축하는데 있어 소고기 문제 해결은 필수불가결한 요소이다. 한국 정부는 우리가 바라는 최종 목표에 아마도 합의할 수 있을 것이라는 신호를 보내고 있다. (모든 부위, 모든 연령대의 소고기를 국제 수의검역 기구의 가이드라인에 따라 허용하는 것이 그 것이다) 그러나 한국이 우리가 원하는 시한에 그 같이 할 준비가 돼 있는지는 명확하지 않다. 소고기 부위와 기간이라는 측면에서 문제가 될 수도 있는 잠정 조치를 대신 제안하고 있다. 백은 아마도 한국 정부의 입장을 재강조할 것이다. 미국은 미국의 기존 수출분의 90%를 수입 허용토록 한 잠정조치에 만족해야 한다는 것이다(이 수치에 대한 우리측 전문가들은 이의를 제기한다) 좀 더 광범위한 논점은 이 것이다: 미국 소고기 수출업자들은 4년 동안 한국 시장이 열리기를 인내심있게 기다려왔다; 한국은 FTA 협상 기간 동안 “당신들의 소고기가 안전하다는(지금 그런 상황이다) 국제적으로 과학적 측면에서 보장이 있을 때까지 기다려달라. 그렇게 되면 우리가 정치적인 힘을 얻을 것이다”라고 말했다; 그리고 노무현 대통령은 부시 대통령과 한국 국민들에게 한국은 국제수의검역기구의 가이드라인을 존중해야 한다고 말했다. 그래서 지금 국제수의검역기구에 부하는 결과에 대한 동의하는 것처럼 한국이 비춰지는 게 중요하다. 백은 특정 부위와 연령대에 대한 미국산 소고기 수입의 금지를 정당화하기 위해 자체적인 과학적 근거를 인용할 수도 있다. 만약 한국이 그들의 소고기 정책을 농림수산부가 좌지우지하도록 하거나(한국의 축산업자들과 시민단체를 달래기 위해) 일본의 무대응 뒤에 숨으려 한다면 우리는 한미 FTA가 비준되도록 할 수 없다. 보커스와 그래슬리 상원의원은 이 점을 분명히 했다. 

¶5. (C) BEEF: While Baek's focus will be on security issues, 
it will be important for him to hear Washington's views on 
two trade issues that are critical for our overall 
relationship. The first is beef, resolution of which is 
indispensable to building Congressional support for FTA 
ratification. The ROKG has begun signaling that it can 
probably agree to our desired end-goal (allowing in beef of 
"all products, all ages," as permitted under the World Animal 
Health Organization (OIE) international guidelines), but it's 
not clear that Korea is prepared to get there in the 
timeframe we need, and is instead proposing an interim phase 
that may be problematic in terms of product coverage or 
duration. Baek will presumably reiterate the ROKG position 
that the U.S. should be satisfied with an interim solution 
that approves 90 percent of our previous exports (a figure 
that our experts contest). 

The broader point is: U.S. beef 
exporters have been patiently waiting for this market to 
reopen for four years; Korea told us during FTA negotiations: 
"wait until international science endorses your beef's safety 
(as it now has), and that will give us necessary political 
cover"; and President Roh told both President Bush and the 
Korean people that Korea would respect the OIE guidelines. 
So now it's critical that Korea be seen as agreeing to an 
OIE-consistent outcome. Baek may cite Korea's own 
"scientific" findings to justify banning U.S. beef of certain 
cuts or ages; but that is not OIE consistent. If Korea is 
going to let its policy on beef be dictated by the 
Agriculture Ministry (and its desire to placate Korean beef 
farmers and NGOs), or try to hide behind Japanese inaction, 
then we won't be able to get the KORUS FTA ratified. 
Senators Baucus and Grassley have made that clear. 

FTA: 우리의 다른 통상 우선 관심사, 즉 FTA는-- 한국에서 FTA 비준을 촉구하면서—백 보좌관에게 설득하기 어려운 주제가 되지 말아야 한다. 우리는 한국 국회가 FTA 비준을 빠르게 하는 걸 보고 싶고 그럼으로써 미국 의회의 비준에 탄력을 주었으면 한다. 마찬가지로 노무현 정부는 한국 국회가 2월 25일 노대통령이 청와대를 떠나기 전에 그의 업적의 하나인 FTA가 비준되기를 원한다. 상당수 한국 국회의원들은 특히 12월 19일 대통령 선거 이전까지 이 문제를 질질 끌어왔다. 그러나 청와대는 전면 압박에 나서고, 선거 이후 레임덕 기간 동안 열릴 국회 회의에서 긍정적인 표를 얻을 수 있다고 낙관하는 것처럼 보인다. (특히 한국 국민들의 FTA 지지가 60~70% 대에 있다는 점에서 그렇다) 만약 한국측 비준이 새 대통령의 취임 이후에 이뤄진다면 정권 이양과 다른 정치적 이벤트들 때문에 비준은 여름이나 그 이후로 미뤄질 수 있다—이는 미국 내 FTA 반대론자들로 하여금 미국 의회가 2009년 이후로 이 논의를 연기하도록 주장하게 할 수도 있다. 상당히 시끄러운 반대에도 불구하고 미국 정부는 한미 FTA에 강하게 매진하고 있으며, 미국 업계의 강력한 지지를 얻고 있고, 2008년 상반기에 의회에서 FTA 비준을 희망하는 입장에 있다는 점을 백 보좌관이 청취하도록 하는 게 유용할 것이다. 그러나 2008년 상반기 통과는 불가능하지는 않지만, 한국의 비준 없이는 매우 어려울 것이다.


¶6. (C) FTA: Our other trade priority -- prompt Korean 
ratification of the FTA -- shouldn't be as hard a sell with 
Baek. We would like to see Korea's National Assembly ratify 
the FTA promptly to help build momentum for Congressional 
ratification. Similarly, the Roh Government would like to 
see the National Assembly ratify the FTA before President Roh 
leaves office on February 25, as part of his legacy. Some 
National Assembly members have been dragging their feet, 
particularly before the December 19 Presidential election, 
but the Blue House is making a full-court press and appears 
to be optimistic that it can get a positive vote in the 
lame-duck legislative session after the election 
(particularly with Korean public support for the FTA still in 
the 60-70 percent range). 

If Korean ratification slips past 
the inauguration of the new President, the transition and 
other political events here could push ratification to the 
summer or beyond -- which would give U.S. opponents an 
argument to defer Congressional action till 2009. It will be 
useful for Baek to hear that, despite some noisy opposition, 
the Administration is strongly committed to KORUS, has the 
strong support of the U.S. business community, and hopes to 
be in a position to move KORUS forward for Congressional 
ratification in the first half of 2008 -- but that will be 
significantly harder, if not impossible, without prompt 
Korean ratification. 

이라크 자이툰 부대 주둔 연장: 한국 국회는 11월 23일 정기 회기 이전에 이라크 자이툰 부대의 주둔 연장안에 대해 표결에 들어가지 않기로 했다. 여당인 신민주당의 지도자들은 공개적으로 모순(불일치)이 드러나는 일을 피하려 하고 있다. 만약 이 법안이 통과된다면, 자당의 후보인 정동영은 이에 대해 반대한 기록이 있기 대문에 모순이 되는 것이다. 이 법안은 국회 국방위에 계류 중이며 우리가 계산한 바로는 10명의 한나라당과 민주당 의원들이 찬성하고, 8명의 신민주당 의원들이 반대한다. 그러나 전체 회의에서는 142명이 찬성하고, 150명이 반대하며 7명은 방향을 결정짓지 못한 것으로 보여진다. 12월 특별 회기가 열릴 것인데, 날짜는 정해지지 않았다. 우리는 이라크에서 한국 군의 계속된 주둔과 지지, 이번 해 말까지 자이툰 부대 주둔 연장의 결정이 나올 경우의 이점을 강조해야 한다.

¶7. (C) EXTENSION OF ROK'S ZAYTUN UNIT IN IRAQ: The National 
Assembly opted not to vote on the motion to extend the Zaytun 
unit mission in Iraq prior to the end of its regular session 
on November 23. Ruling UNDP party leaders sought to avoid 
publicly highlighting the "discrepancy" that would have been 
apparent if the bill were approved while the party's 
candidate for president, Chung Dong-young, was on record as 
opposed to it. The bill remains within the Defense Committee 
for the time being, where our vote count indicates a total of 
10 GNP and Democratic Party members in support of the 
extension, while 8 UNDP members stand opposed. Composition 
of the plenary body, however, indicates 142 votes in favor 
and 150 opposed, with the 7 swing votes up for grabs. 

An 
extraordinary session will be held sometime in December, but 
the start date has not yet been set. We should stress the 
importance of the ROK's continued presence and support in 
Iraq as well as the merits to a positive decision on Zaytun 
by the end of this year. 

아프가니스탄 그 이후: 우리는 백 보좌관에게 한국 정부가 계속해서 2008년에도 아프간의 바그람에서 의료부대를 운영할 계획이라는 소식을 들었으면 기쁘겠다고 말해야 한다. 한국이 아프간에서 PRT를 주도할지에 대한 추가적인 고려를 할 수 있게 됐다는 점에서 백에게 격려가 주어져야 한다. 우즈벡의 전력선 프로젝트를 지원하는데 필요한 재정적 지원을 제공하는 것도 마찬가지이다. 아프간 육군에 한국군 장비를 기증하는 것도 도움이 될 것이다. 

¶8. (C) AFGHANISTAN AND BEYOND: We should tell Baek that we 
are pleased to hear that the ROK plans to continue operating 
its medical clinic in Bagram in 2008. Baek should be 
encouraged to have the ROK give additional consideration to 
lead a PRT in Afghanistan, as well as providing the financial 
assistance needed to support the Uzbek powerline project. 
Donations of ROK military equipment to the Afghan Army would 
also be helpful. 


비자 면제 프로그램: 한국 국민들과 정부 관리들은 비자 면제 프로그램을 획득하기를 열망하고 있다. 이는 한국에게는 특권이 될 것이다. 그러나 한국과 미국 양측이 이를 위해 해야 할 일들이 남아 있다. 새로운 비자 생략 프로그램의 안보 조항들은 올해 초 시행에 들어갔다—철저한 공항 보안 절차; 좀 더 면밀한 항공기 보안; 범죄와 테러 행위에 대한 정보 공유; 분실 혹은 도난 비자에 대한 정보 교환—등이 그 것으로 대부분 한ㅇ국 정부 관리들이 받아들일 수 있는 것들이다. 반면 한국의 사생활 보호법은 정부가 제 3자에게 범죄기록을 공개하도록 허용하지 않고 있다. 한국 측은 한국이 통로가 아닌 방식으로 범죄 기록을 미국 정부가 얻을 수 있도록 하는 방법을 찾는데 열중하고 있다. 비자 면제 프로그램 가입은 전자여권을 필요로 한다. 정부 관리들은 2008년 중반까지 한국인들이 그런 여권을 갖게 하도록 할 결심을 했다. 미국측 입장을 보면, 국토 안보부가 비자면제프로그램 여행자가 미국을 향해 출발하기 전 신원 체크를 가능케 하는 전자여행허가서 개발을 위한 예산이 확보되지 않았다고 보고하고 있다. 일단 예산이 확정되면 전자여행허가서는 12개월 안에 가동될 것이다. 그러므로 백 보좌관에게 모든 일이 순조롭게 풀리면 한국은 2009년 상반기에 전면적인 비자면제프로그램 대상 국가가 될 것이라고 설명하는 게 합리적이다.

¶9. (C) VISA WAIVER PROGRAM: Korean citizens and government 
officials are eager to obtain Visa Waiver Program (VWP) 
privileges for the ROK, but work remains to be done by both 
the ROK and the U.S. New VWP security requirements put in 
place earlier this year -- including solid airport security 
practices; tighter aircraft security; sharing information on 
criminal activity and terrorism; and exchanging information 
on lost and stolen passports -- are mostly acceptable to ROK 
officials. While Korean privacy laws do not permit 
government release of criminal records to third parties, the 
ROK side is committed to finding a way to help the USG get 
criminal record data without itself being a conduit. 


Joining 
the VWP also requires an e-passport and officials are 
determined Korean citizens will have such a document by 
mid-2008. 
On the U.S. side, DHS reports that development of 
its Electronic Travel Authorization (ETA), to permit name 
checks of VWP travelers prior to embarking for the U.S. under 
the new VWP, is not yet funded. Once funded, ETA can 
reportedly be put in place in about 12 months. Thus it would 
be reasonable to tell Baek that, if all goes well, the ROK 
might be eligible to become a full VWP partner the first half 
of 2009. 
---------------------- 
END OF WAR DECLARATION 
---------------------- 
전쟁 종료 선언의 목적
11월 28일 면담에서 대사는 백 보좌관은 계속된 한국과 미국 사이의 조율의 필요성을 강조했다. 북한 문제가 이에 포함된다. 그리고 북한이 계속해 핵무기를 보유하고 있는 한, 미국 대통령이 김정일을 만나는데 동의할 가능성이 없다는 점을 재차 강조했다. 
¶10. (C) During their November 28 meeting the Ambassador 
emphasized to Baek the need for continued close ROK-U.S. 
coordination, including on North Korean issues, and 
reiterated that there was no chance that POTUS would agree to 
meet Kim Jong-il while the DPRK still possessed nuclear 
weapons. 
백은 노무현 대통령이 그 같은 회동을 성취할 수 없을 것이라고 단념하는 듯 보였다. 그러나 그럼에도 불구하고 한국 전쟁 종료 조기 선언을 해야 한다는 청와대의 주장을 되풀이 했다. 백은 “한국전쟁 종료 선언”이라는 문구는 10월 4일 남북 정상회담 선에서 사용된 것으로 그러한 선언이 공식적인 평화 협정의 일부분을 의미하는 것은 아니다라고 설명했다. 대신 이런 아이디어는 4개국 지도자들로 하여금 서로간에 관계 정상화를 하자, 핵문제를 풀자는 정치적인 노력을 보여주는 것이 될 수 있다. 만일 북한이 핵을 해체한다면 이는 중대한 진전으로 지도자들이 한국 전쟁이 종료를 선언하는 것은 적절한 응답이 될 수 있다고 백은 말했다. 그는 1978년 캠프 데이비드 협정을 지도자들이 모여 합의가 이뤄지기 전에 평화를 촉진시킨 사례로 들었다. 백은 미국 대통령과 김정일 회담은 북한의 핵무기 보유에 정당성을 부여하는 일로 볼 수 있다는 대사의 지적에 동의했다. 그러나 문제는 미국이 북한에 대해 적대적인 정책을 거둬들이지 않는 한 북한은 핵무기를 포기하지 않을 것이라고 주장한다는 점이다. 그는 전쟁 종료 선언은 그렇게 하는데 있어 상징적인 수단이 될 수 있다고 주장했다. 백은 아마도 차기 한국 정부는 미국과 이 문제에 대해 공동의 근거를 찾을 수 있을 것이라고 말함으로써 이 주제에 대한 그의 말을 끝냈다.

¶11. (C) Baek appeared resigned that President Roh would not 
be able to achieve such a meeting, but he nevertheless 
repeated the Blue House arguments for an early declaration to 
end the Korean War. 

Baek said that the phrase "declaring the 
end to the Korean War" as used in the October 4 South-North 
Summit Declaration did not mean that such a declaration would 
be part of a formal peace agreement. Instead, the idea would 
be to bring together the leaders of the four countries to 
show a "political commitment" to establishing normal 
relations with each other and resolving the nuclear issue. 
If the DPRK were to start dismantlement, Baek said, that 
would be a significant step, and for leaders to then declare 
the end of the Korean War would be an appropriate response. 
On the other hand, waiting to declare the end of the War 
until a formal peace agreement was in place would take a long 
time. He cited the 1978 Camp David accords as an example of 
leaders coming together to promote peace before an agreement 
was in place. 
Baek said he agreed with the Ambassador's 
point that a POTUS-Kim Jong-il meeting could be seen as 
legitimizing the DPRK's possession of nuclear weapons, but 
the problem was that the DPRK insisted that it would not give 
up its nuclear weapons until the U.S. gives up its "hostile 
policy." Declaring an end of the war, he argued, would be a 
symbolic way of doing so. Baek closed the subject by saying 
that perhaps the next ROK government could find common ground 
with the U.S. on this. 

------------------ 
ROK-U.S. RELATIONS 
------------------ 
한국-북한 관계
백은 미국으로부터 감사의 표시를 원할 것 같다. 왜냐면 그와 노무현 대통령이 한미 관계를 개선하기 유지하기 위해 한 일을 남다른 노력으로 간주하고 있기 때문이다. 지난 4~5년 동안 노무현 정부와 대화에서 잡음, 그리고 수시로 등장한 반미 정치수사를 고려할 때, 이는 힘을 좀 써야 하는 일이 될 수도 있다. 그러나 지난 한해 동안 우리는 전작권 이양을 포함하는 방위동맹 등에서 핵심 문제를 풀어왔다. 그리고 FTA 문제를 결론짓고, 대 북한 문제에서 보조를 맞춰왔다. 이런 노력에 대해 백에게 감사를 표시하는 것은 합리적이다. 하지만 이와 동시에 신뢰의 정도와 협의가 2개의 동맹이 취할 수 있는 수준에 이르지 못했다는 메시지를 보내야 한다. 그럼에도 불구하고, 노대통령은 2월 25일 그의 후임자에게 건강한 한미 관게를 넘겨줄 것이다.—-우리는 모두 이 날을 꼽고 있다.

¶12. (C) Baek is likely to seek an expression of gratitude 
from the U.S. for what he and President Roh regard as 
extraordinary efforts to sustain and improve ROK-U.S. 
relations. Given the scratchiness of our dialogue with Roh 
over the past 4-5 years and his recurrent anti-American 
rhetoric, this might appear to be a stretch. But over the 
last year, we have managed to resolve key problems in the 
defense alliance, including OPCON transfer, conclude the 
KORUS FTA, and stay on the same page on North Korea. It 
would be reasonable to thank Baek for those efforts, while at 
the same time sending the message that the degree of trust 
and consultation has been less than what two close allies 
should aspire to. Nevertheless, President Roh will hand over 
a healthy U.S.-ROK alliance to his successor on February 25 
-- we're all counting the days. 
VERSHBOW