^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  07SEOUL2556  |  2007-08-24 05:02  |  비밀  |  서울대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PREL MARR KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 제14차 한미안보정책구상회의 보고 ======
비 밀 SEOUL 002556 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 08/08/2017 
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 제14차 한미안보정책구상회의 보고
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사.   근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/08/10 01:00//
===== 요점 =====

1.(비밀) 요점: 제14차 안보정책구상회의는 7월 27일 하와이에서 개최되었다. 국방부 국방장관실/아시아태평양안보과 수석 부차관보이 미국대표단의 수석대표였으며, 한국은 국방부 국방정책실장 전재국 박사가 한국 대표단의 수석대표를 맡았다. 회의분위기는 좋았으며, 이번 회의는 공식석상 및 사교석상의 친목에 있어 풍부한 기회를 제공하였다. 해당 의제는 전번 안보정책구상회의의 경우보다 치열한 논쟁이 덜하였다. 이번 회의의 핵심사안은 아래와 같다:
  * 한국의 피랍자 사태: 쉰 수석 부차관보는 아프간의 탈레반에 의한 한국인 23명을 피랍 사태에 대한 우려를 표명하고 모든 미국의 협조를 제공하겠다는 국방장관의 서신을 전 실장에게 전달하였다.

  * 전시 작전통제권: 미국은 6월 28일에 서명한 전략적 이행 계획을 브리핑하였는데, 해당 계획은 전시 작전통제권 이양일 2012년 4월 17일 이전에 완수되어야 할 이양과업을 소개하고 있다. 본 연습 프로그램은 //“결정적인 길잡이”//이며, 한국의 예산 약정은 그런 노력에 대한 //“결정적인 투입”//이라고 특정하고 있다. 한국측은 다음 안보정책구상외의에서 국방부의 예산 계획에 관한 브리핑을 하기로 약속하였다.

  * 정전 관리: 정전 관리책임 문제를 해결하기 위한 //“로드맵 초안”//에 관해 브리핑을 하였다. 양측은 고위급 실무그룹의 작업내용에 대해 만족감을 표명하였다. 양측은 로드맵 초안의 승인에 합의하였고, 2007년 11월 7일에 갖을 안보협의회의를 위해 재시간에 해당 로드맵을 완결 짓도록 실무그룹에게 지시하였다.

  * 동맹 훈련/준비태세: 쉰 수석 부차관보는 한미동맹 훈련 및 준비태세를 해소하기 위해 국방부가 여름 내 타당한 노력을 해준데 대해 감사표명을 하였다. 전제국은 다음 수순은 양해각서와 더불어 이행약속을 공식화하고 확대하는 것임을 확인하였다. 쉰 수석 부차관보는 한미 양국의 공군 수준에서 해당 상세내역을 내놓는 것이 최선일 것이라고 생각을 같이하였다. 그러나 미군은 양국 공군이 준비태세 및 훈련에 더 이상 지장을 주지 않는 제도를 개발하는 것이 무엇보다도 중요하게 생각한다고 강조하였다. 본 사안은 조속히 해결돼야 할 필요가 있다.

  * 주한미군 재배치: 한국 대표단은 용산기지이전사업과 연합토지관리계획이 앞으로 나아가고 있다고 브리핑하였다―해당 부지의 오래된 건물의 철거가 99퍼센트 완료되었고, 2008년에 새 건물 건설의 첫 삽을 뜰 계획이다. 미국측은 진행 과정에 전반적인 만족감을 표시하였지만, 2006년 말 국회가 제시한 부대의견을 지적하길, 쉰 수석 부차관보는 한국이 방위비 분담금을 더 이상 종합토지관리계획에 사용하지 못할 수있다는 부대의견을 우회할 수있는 가능한 방법을 도출할 필요가 있다고 강력히 주의를 당부하였다.

  * 미군 변환: 미국 대표단은 13차 회의와 마찬가지로 미군 변환은 긍정적인 상황전개이며, 한반도상에 전투력 강화를 가져올 것이라고 재차 언급하였다. 미국 대표단은 한국 언론의 잘못된 헤드라인으로 인해 미8군사령부가 //“한반도상에 유지될 것”//이라고 믿도록 한국민을 호도하고 있다며 우려를 표명하였다. 미국측은 미8군 변환은 한반도상에 전방전투지휘소에 두고, 반면에 주지휘소는 하와이에 위치할 것이라는 점을 설명하였다. 한국측은 그 점을 이해하며 미8군 변환 문제에 관해 새로 생기는 언론 지침이나 언론의 논지와 관련해 면밀히 공조할 것이라고 말하였다. 다음 안보정책구상회의에서 한국 합참의 변환과 관련해 미국에게 한국이 브리핑을 제공하겠다고 덧붙였다.

  * 안보 협력: 한국측은 이라크와 아프간 그리고 레바논에 한국군 파병의 상황에 대해 미국에 브리핑하였다. 레바논에는 7월 19일에 350명 인원의 동명부대가 파견되었다. 전 실장은 9월에 이라크 자이툰 부대 파병을 연장할 것인지 결정을 할 것이라고 말하였다. 한국 대표단은 가즈니에서의 한국 시민 피랍사태가 아프간 재건에 있어 한국의 역할에 어떻게 충격을 가할 것인지 한국대표단은 확신을 못하였다.

  * 중국 군사력 보고: 전 실장은 국방부 2007년 중국 군사력 보고에 대한 응하길 중국 군사배치상의 이동으로 중국이 국경 보안이란 명목으로 중국이 한반도상에 개입할 수 있는 가능성이 커졌다고 말하였다. 국방부 국제협력부장 김규현은 중국이 군사적으로 //“적극적이고 공세적으로, 심지어 공격적인”// 자세를 취하고 있다고 말하였다. 중국이 군사력 증강을 위한 자체 계획과 관련해 더욱 투명해질 것을 중국정부에게 설득하는 것이 중요하다고 참가자 전원은 의견을 같이하였다.

  * 논의된 다수의 한미 동맹사안은 상호 관련되어 있고 해서, 개별 사안을 서로 통일되게 일 처리할 필요가 있다고 양측은 동의하면서 회의를 마쳤다. 양국 대표단은 다음 안보정책구상회의를 제39차 연례안보협의회의 이전인 10월 제주에서 열기로 합의하였다. //요점 끝.//

===== 아프간 현지 한국인 피랍 =====

2.(미분류) 2007년 6월 27일 미국 그리고 한국 부처 합동 대표단은, 한국은 전제국 국방정책실장이 수석대표를 맡고, 미국은 짐 쉰 국방장관실/아시아태평양안보과 수석 부차관보가 수석대표를 맡아 호놀룰루에 위치한 안보연구 목적의 아시아태평양센터에서 제14차 안보정책구상회의를 위해 회합하였다. 쉰 수석 부차관보는 6월 20일에 아프간 현지에서 탈레반에 의해 피랍된 한국인 23명과 관련 미국의 우려 표명과 함께 회의를 시작하였다. 또한 사망한 선교 단체의 지도자인 배형규 목사에 대해 애도를 표명하였다. (주석: 선교단의 또 한 명의 구성원은 몇 일 후에 사살되었다). 수석 부차관보 쉰은 뒤이어 인명의 손실에 대한 슬픔을 전하고, 남은 피랍자의 석방을 담보하기 위한 모든 미국의 가용 지원을 제공한다는 게이츠 국방장관의 서신을 전 실장에게 전달하였다. 전 실장은 남한 정부는 미국정부의 지원과 관심에 대해 매우 감사한다고 응답하였다.

===== 한미동맹 지지에 대한 발언들 =====

3.(미분류) 전 실장과 합참 전략기획부장인 김중련((번역 주: 김중련은 천안암 사고 시간을 조작한 두 명중 한 명으로 지목되고 있는 인물이기도 하다―이미 있었던 것이 훗날에 다시 있을 것이며, 이미 일어났던 일이 훗날 다시 일어날 것이다. 이 세상에 새 것이란 없다. 전도서 1장 9절 ―통킨만 사건이 있었기에, 천안함 사건이 있는 것이다. PoirotKr 말씀.)) 해군 소장은 한국전쟁종전 52주년 기념일을 한미간에 강한 유대관계에 경의를 표명하는 이유로써 거론하였다. 전 실장은 전날 태평양 국립묘지를(펀치볼 국립공원)  방문했으며, 그 곳에서 마지막 희생을 바쳤던 사람들을 미국이 어떻게 추모하는지 직접 목도하였다고 말하였다. 김 소장은 한국전에서 목숨을 바친 미국 동맹군을 추모하면서 고개를 조아렸다고 말하였다. //“우리는 피로써 맺은 동맹국이며, 우리의 가슴속에 상호신뢰가 자리하고 있다”//고 김 해군소장은 말하였다. 워싱턴 주재 한국 대사관으로 발령되기 전 본 회의에 마지막 모습을 드려낸 국방부 국제협력국장 김규현 박사는 지난 호놀룰루에서 갖은 한미안보정책구상회의 동안에는 매우 흐린 하늘 이였지만, 맑은 하늘 덕분인지 한미동맹의 상태가 매우 호전되었다고 언급하면서, 최근 한미동맹 관계가 강해졌음을 목격했다고 말하였다. 쉰 수석 부차관보는 한미동맹에 강력한 성원을 보내 주는 한국 대표단에게 감사의 뜻을 전하면서, 한미동맹의 유지가 심각한 사업이며, 또한 우리의 젊은 아들 딸들이((번역 주: other young men and women, 이 표현은 미국과 한국의 문화 차이를 여실히 보여주는 대목이다. “미국은 ‘또 다른 남성과 여성이’ 희생되지 않도록”이란 표현을 사용하지만 우리식으로 한다면 “우리 아들 딸들이 혹은 우리 후손들이”라는 표현을 쓴다는 점이다―평가를 차치하더라도, 한국의 가족중심 문화를 엿보이는 점이다.)) 절대 똑같은 희생을  치르지 않도록 우리가 강력한 한미동맹을 반드시 계속 유지해야만 함을 확실히 상기시켜주는 한국 대표단의 발언이라고 지적하였다.

===== 전시 작전통제권 이양 =====

4.(기밀) 쉰 수석 부차관보와 세드니 부차관보의 첫 안보정책구상회의 참여를 공식적으로 환영한 이후에, 전 실장은 회의 의제에 대한 자신의 동의의사를 표명하였고, 2012년 4월 17일 전시 작전통제권 이양 계획의 현주소에 관한 프리젠테이션을 시작하도록 미국 대표단에게 요청하였다. 연합사령부 기획참모부((번역 주: C5, 주의할 점은 주한미군의 ‘C-5’는 미 해군을 지칭한다)) 부참모장((Deputy Chief)) 로버트 가드너 대령은 6월 28일에 서명한 전략적 이양 계획은 전작권 이양이 발동한 이후에 한미동맹의 능력을 최대화하고, 침략을 저지하는 준비태세 유지를 담보하기 위해 취해야할 여러 전략적 과제를 소개하는 총괄계획이라고 설명하였다. 그는 전작권 이양 노력에서 핵심요소는 훈련 및 연습프로그램이라고 지적하였고, 양측은 이제 사무국을 세우는 작업을 하고 있다고 통지하였다. 주한미군 기획참모부((USFK J5)) 프랭크 팬터 소장은 연습 프로그램이 성공적인 이양으로 안내하는 //“결정적인 길잡이”//인 이유는 새로운 여러 개념과 구조, 그리고 절차를 마련하는데 시금석이 될 메커니즘이기 때문이라고 역시 강조하였다. 전 실장은 훌륭하게 개발된 개념과 계획 문서라며, 전략적 이양 계획을 작성한 군 전문가 팀에 찬사를 보냈다. 전 실장은 예산 및 기타 요건에 대한 국방부의 지원을 강조함과 더불어, 전략적 이양 계획 이행은 전략적 이양 계획 체결 이후 일 주 후에 시작될 것임을 지적하였다. 전 실장은 한국군은 한국 합동군사령부((번역 주: 연합사령부는 해체되고, 그 것을 대체하는 조직으로 구상한 것 같다. 그러나 이명박 정부는 전작권 이양 연도를 2015년으로 연기하였고, 그 내용 아직 자세히 확인은 못했지만 달라졌을 것이다. 자세한 내용은 [[wp>한미연합사령부]]를 보라.)) 설립 요건에 전략적 이양 계획의 여러 과제가 부합하도록 하는 작업을 하고 있다고 말하였다. 그는 이제는 계획을 이행하는데 양국의 긴밀한 공조가 중요하다고 말하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 국방부 예산의 집행에 대한 적절한 약정이 해당 과정에서 //“결정적인 투입”//임을 지적하였다. 이에 전 실장은 국방부는 다음 안보정책구상회의에서 미국 대표단에게 자체 예산 계획의 브리핑을( 국회에 제출한 같은 계획안) 할 것을 약속하였다. 쉰 수석 부차관보는 미합중국 구성원들은 한국의 상대역들과 함께 하는 이행 과정에 기대가 크다고 말하면서 작전통제권 이양 문제를 마감하였다. 전 실장은 수많은 해당 과제들이 있지만 2012년 이양 날짜에 맞춰 작업이 완료될 것이라고 대답하였다.

===== 정전 유지 책임 =====

5.(기밀) 외교통상부 북미3과장 이정규는 정전 유지 책임에 대한 결의안인 //“로드맵 초안”//에 대한 브리핑을 하였다. 전 실장은 정전 유지 책임에 관한 현재까지 고위 실무그룹의 작업에 대해 매우 만족했다면서, 로드맵의 개요에 대한 승인에 합의하였다고 말하였다. 그는 실무그룹은 두 가지 점을 염두에 두고 해당 로드맵을 계속 개발하라고 요청하였다: 1) 최종 로드맵은 가능하면 간결하고, 융통성이 있어야 한다, 그리고; 2) 11월 7일 서울에서 열릴 2007년 안보협의회의에 보고하기 위하여, 제 시간에 완료돼야만 한다. 전 실장과 황승현 외교통상부 특별조정관((국내에선 당시 국제협력관으로 줄여서 호칭하였다, 공식 명칭은 국제협력특별조정관으로 보인다)), 그리고 국방부 김 국장은 모두 로드맵에 특정이행 기일을 포함하라는 미국의 제안에 반대의 목소리를 내면서, 연례안보협의회의 이전에 그런 확정 기한을 설정하기에는 충분한 시간이 없다고 말하였다. 한국측은 최소한 연구 기한을 정해서 일이 진전되고 있음을 연례안보협의회의에서 미국과 한국 국방 지도부에게 설명하자는 제안에 대해 역시 저항하였다.

6.(기밀) 주석: 아침 일정 이후에 휴식시간에, 황승현 외교통상부 특별조정관은 6자 회담에서의 진전으로 정전협정을 대체할 평화 메커니즘의 설립 가능성에 대한 정치적인 수사 등 기대를 갖게한다고 대사관 정치군사 팀장에게 설명하였다. 정치계의 동향을 고려할 때, 청와대는 정전협정에 가해질 변화에 관한 복잡스런 헤드라인 생성을 피하길 원하였다고 황승현은 설명하였다. 그는 한국정부는 여전히 정전 관리에 관한 수용 가능한 해결책을 전적으로 내놓을 의향이라고 강조하였고, 또한 고위급 작업반을 통한 계속적인 협의에 아무런 문제가 없음을 안심시켰다. 서울로 복귀하는 중에, 국방부 관계관은 주한미군 기획참모부에 연락을 취해서 말하길, 한국이 고위급 실무그룹에서 연구 마감일을 정하자는 미국의 제안을 수용하기로 방침이 바뀌었다고 하였다((번역 주: 노무현 대통령의 부끄러운 줄 알아야지 하는 발언이 떠오르는 것은 왜일까?―보고한 뒤에, 누군가의 지시가 아니라면 복귀 중에 방침을 바꾸지는 않았을 것이다.)). //주석 끝.//

===== 동맹 훈련 및 준비태세 =====

7.(기밀) 쉰 수석 부차관보는 동맹 훈련 및 준비태세와 관련 미국과 한국군이 거의 3년 동안을 씨름했던 (주로 영공 관리와 공대지 사격 훈련장에 집중된)우려사안을 해결하기 위해 여름 동안에 국방부가 해준 훌륭한 노력에 대해서 전 실장에게 감사를 표시하였다. 전 실장은 직도 채점장비 설치는 (6월 25일) 안보정책구상회의 이틀 전에 시작되었으며, 또한 8월 말 경에 완공을 예상한다고 보고하였다. 그는 직도 관련 양해각서가 필요하고, 또한 한국 공군과 미7공군 수준에서 다뤄져야 한다고 강조하였다. 전 실장은 공해 관리에 관련해 다음 수순은 양해각서를 준비함으로써, 초기 90일 합의를 넘어서는 약정일 확대와 그 것의 공식화라는 점을 인정하였다. 그는 한국은 미7공군 훈련 요건에 관한 더 많은 정보를 요청하였는데, 미국은 해당 정보를 제공하지 않았다고 말하였다. 그는 미국의 영공 요청을 평가하기 위해서 중요한 점은 한국이 미국의 해당 정보를 보유하는 것이라고 계속 덧붙였다. 그러나 전 실장은 해당 과제는 대게 기술적인 자세한 내용을 담고 있기 때문에, 공군 전문가에게 되돌려 줘야만 한다고 열띤 제안을 하였다. 그는 필승 사격장의 유지 비용과 책임소재는 해결되어야할 문제로 남겨져 있지만, 해당 사안들이 안보정책구상회의 수준으로 결코 상정되어서는 안 된다고 말하였다. 한국측은 전자전 문제를 제기하였고, 전자전 훈련의 부족을 해결하기 위한 미국의 계획을 요청하였다. 펜터 소장은 미국의 전자전 장비가 필승 사격장에서 제거되었으며, 재설치되지 않을 것이라고 말하였다. 김 국장은 //“다수의 경우에 미국은 훈련 목적의 항공기를 한반도 이외의 지역에서 불러들일 경우에 한국에게 시의 적절하게 통보하는데 실패했다고”// 우려를 덧붙였다. 그는 한국은 한반도 이외의 해당 자산을 이용한 훈련을 지원하길 원하지만, 더 낳은 조율이 필요하다고 말하였다. 미국 대표단은 응답하길, 예상치 못한 훈련 필요상의 변화로 시의 적절한 통지에 제약이 있었지만, 훈련 시설물의 합동 이용과 조정에 있어 더욱 개선하도록 한국 공군 상대역들과 계속 협력하겠다고 약속하였다. 쉰 수석 부차관보는 해당 사안들이 확인되었을 때 조속히 해결해야하며, 안보정책구상회의에서 다뤄질 필요가 없도록 해야한다고 말하였다. 그는 더 이상 양국 공군이 준비태세 및 훈련상에 손실을 입지 않도록 하나의 시스템을 개발하는 것이 결정적으로 중요하다고 강조하였다.

===== 주한미군 재배치 =====

8.(기밀) 주한미군 재배치와 용산기지이전 그리고 연합토지관리계획으로 화제를 바꿔서, 한국대표단은 아래와 같은 진전상황 보고를 제공하였다.
  * 해당부지에 222가구 당 한 가구가 남아있다. 소유자는 시장가격 이상의 보상금을 모색하고 있다. 한국정부는 그러므로 형사 소추를 준비하고 있다.
  * 해당 부지의 예전 건물의 철거는 99퍼센트 완료되었다. 폐기물 처리는 60퍼센트 완료되었다.
  * 문화재 발굴은 40퍼센트 완료되었다. 8월 말에 완료될 것이다.
  * 1 구역의 성토작업은 11퍼센트 완료되었다.
  * K 구역 개발 계약은 8월/9월에 제공될 것이다.
  * 새 건물의 첫 시공은 본부 및 4개의 핵심시설물을 포함한다(병원, 통신, 등등)
  * 필수 작업인 공사현장 진입로 건설은 2008년 6월을 완공기일로 잡고 계속 공사 중이다.
  * 종합사업관리 용역업체는 현재 활동 중이다.
9.(민감하지만미분류)  주한미군 공병 및 일반참모 댄 러셀 대령은 상황을 요약해서 말하길, //“땅은 지금 움직이고 있고, 건물은 곧 올라갈 것이다.”// 전 실장과 쉰 수석 부차관보는 러셀 대령과 한국측 상대역인 주한미군기지이전 팀장 박상률 대령에게 재배치 사업을 이행단계로 이끌어 준 노고에 감사를 표했다.

===== 방위비 분담금·연합토지관리계획 =====

10.(기밀) 주한미군 재배치 협의 중에, 세드니 부차관보는 한국의 방위비 분담금을 연합토지관리계획에 근거한 건설 기금으로 사용하지 말라는 2006년 말 국회의 부대의견을 놓고 미국의 우려를 제기하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 미국정부는 연합토지관리계획 기금이 두 개의 자금줄로((번역 주: 그 중 하나가 방위비 분담금이며, 즉 한국의 분담금이 곧 주한미군의 예산이 되는 셈, 다시 말해서 마누라 돈이 남편 돈이란 말!?)) 구성된 주한미군 예산에서 조달될 것이라고 줄곧 분명히 밝혀왔다고 했다. 방위비 분담금은 연합토지관리계획의 완성을 위한 두 개의 자금줄 중 하나를 이루고 있다(다른 하나는 미국 군·건설). 이러한 심각한 문제가 야기된 이유는 한국정부가 국회에 해당 양해사항을 설명하는데 실패했기 때문이다. 전 실장은 미국의 우려사안을 알고 있으며, 외교 창구를 통해서 적절한 해결책이 나오기를 희망한다고 대답하였다. 그러나, 한국정부는 국회와 언론 그리고 한국 국민에게 적절한 설명을 했다고 단호히 주장하였다. 그러나 그 설명으로 국회의 권한 행사를 예방하지는 못했다고 말하였다. 외교통상부 황 특별조정관은 국회의 부대의견이 철회될 수없기 때문에 더 안정적이고, 투명한 방위비 분담금 처리과정이 문제 해결에 필요하다는 것이 한국의 입장이라고 말하였다. 그는 미국과 한국의 협상자들은 올해 말경에 진전된 방향으로 반드시 합의해야 한다고 덧붙였다. 쉰 수석 부차관보는 한국 대표단의 평가에 감사하였지만, 만일 한국정부가 국회의 지시를 우회하거나, 번복시킬 방법을 찾지 못한다면, 연합토지관리계획  목적의 방위비 분담금 사용을 두고 한미동맹이 큰 문제에 봉착할 것이라고 경고하였다. 그는 만일 미국과 한국이 국회의 부대의견을 수용하지 않는다면, 현재 진행 중인 주한미군 재배치 계획의 이행이 멈춰 설 것임을 지적하였다.

===== 미군 변환 =====

11.(기밀) 미국 대표단은 미군 변환은 긍정적인 발전이며, 한반도상의 전투력을 강화하는 결과를 낳을 것이라고 전번 회의의 발언을 재언급하였다. 한국측은 미군 변환 목적의 이해와 만족감을 표명하였다. 팬터 소장은 한국언론의 미8군사령부가 //“한반도에 남을 것”//이라고 한국민을 호도하는 잘못된 헤드라인에 대해 우려를 표명하였다. 그런 보도는 절반의 진실이라고 경고하면서, 전투사령부 2성 장성이 한국에 남는 가운데, 3성 장성이 지휘하는 미8군 주지휘소는 호놀루루에 주재할 것이다. 그러므로 위기 발생시 3성 장군이 전투 수행을 위해 한국에 오게 된다. 팬터는 전투사령부는 현 미8군 본부보다 더 많은 능력을 갖춘 한반도상의 진정한 전투사령부가 될 것이라고 덧붙였다. 이러한 변화는 미군의 전 세계 변환 목적과 계획에 맞춰 조정되었다고 팬터는 결론 졌다. 김 소장은 한국정부는 브리핑 받은 내용을 이해한다는 점을 표시하면서, 이 사안에 관해 분명한 정리를 추가로 제공해준 점에 감사했고, 한국은 앞으로 미8군사령부 변환과 관련된 여하한 언론지침 혹은 언론의 논지와 관련해 미국과 긴밀히 협의하겠다고 제의하였다. 그는 다음 안보정책구상회의에서 이번엔 한국측이 한국 합동참모본부에 관한 브리핑을 제공할 것이라고 제안하였다.

===== 이라크, 아프간, 레바논에서의 안보협력 =====

12.(기밀)  국방부 국제협력차장 송승종 대령은 이라크와 아프간 그리고 레바논 한국군 파병의 근황과 관련해 미국 대표단에게 브리핑하였다. 송 대령은 자신의 브리핑을 레바논임시주둔유엔군에 최근에 파병한 한국군에 집중하였다. 그는 동명(동방의 빛) 부대는 의료 및 공병 역량을 갖춘 350명 인원의 보병대대로써, 7월 19일에 티레 북쪽 근방으로 파병되었다고 설명하였다. 전 실장은 한국의 이라크 자이툰 파병 문제를 다루면서, 한국정부는 일 년 더 파병을 연장할 것인지 여부를 9월에 결정할 것이라고 하였다. 그는 한국은 이라크에 한국군 주둔의 중요성을 충분히 알고 있으며, 파병연장에 관한 결정을 내릴 때 //“매우 신중을 기할 것”//이라고 안심시켰다. 그는 한국정부가 국회에 넘어가기 이전에 미국정부에게 사전 통지를 할 것이라고 또한 말하였다.

13.(기밀) 아프간 상황에 대한 간단한 후속논의 중에, 한국 대표단은 23명의 한국 시민이 탈레반에 의해 피랍된 사태로 인해 향후 아프간에서의 한국의 역할에 어떻게 충격이 있을 지에 대해 아무런 표시도 하지 않았다. 그러나 업무 밖에서, 연 말에 한국이 아프간에서의 한국군을 귀환시킬 것이라는 게 그들의 공통된 견해이며, 그런 한국정부의 결정은 피랍사태 이전에 내려진 결정에 따르는 것이다. 아프간 현지의 한국 의료 및 공병부대를 동일 성격의 민간부문으로 대체하려는 한국의 계획상에 피랍 사태가 어떻게 영향을 미칠 것인지 어느 누구도 확신하지 못했다. 그러나 피랍자의 사망이 추가로 생긴다면, 한국정부가 선거의 해인 올해 민간인을 그 곳에 파견하는 것이 안전하다고 국민을 납득시키기가 훨씬 어려워질 것이라고 모든 참석자들은 우려를 표명하였다. 안보협력 관련 주어진 시간을 마감하면서, 세드니 부차관보는 이 사안에 관한 한국의 논란은 미국에서 벌어지고 있는 이라크 현지 미국의 미래 역할에 대한 논란과 매우 흡사하다고 평가하였다. 그래서 우리는 이 문제가 쉽지 않음을 알고 있다고 그는 말하였다.

===== 중국 군사력 보고 =====

14.(비밀) 국방장관실/아시아태평양보안과 데이비드 하비가 펜타곤의 2007년 중국 군사력 보고에 관한 브리핑을 제공한 이후,  쉰 수석 부차관보가 한국 대표단의 견해를 묻자, 전 실장은 중국군 현대화를 주의 깊게 주시하고 있다고 답변하였다. 그는 중국군의 군사 배치는 수동적인 방어전략에서 한층 적극적인 방어로 전환되었음을 한국은 인지했다고 말하였다. 결과적으로, 중국이 국경보안이라는 명목으로 한반도에 개입할 수있다는 게 국방부의 견해이다. 그는 한국정부는 중국 인민 해방군이 역내 전체를 중국의 신 무기의 타격범위에 두는 전방 장거리 정밀 타격력을 분명하게 추구하고 있는 점을 보았기 때문에, 한국정부는 매우 우려하고 있다고 뒤이어 말하였다. 중국이 국제사회에서 책임있는 이해당사자가 되도록 우리가 적극 장려하는 게 중요하다고 전제국은 촉구하면서, 더 많은 투명성의 확보가 중국의 이미지 개선에 실제로 도움이 될 것임을 중국 당국에 상기시켜야 한다고 했다.

15.(비밀) 김 국장은 중국이 한층 //“적극적이고 공세적으로, 심지어 공격적인”// 군사 태세를 취하고 있으며, 이는 한국에게 매우 걱정스러운 일이라고 말하였다.그는 국방장관 김장수가 가장 최근 장관급 회담에서 중국 인민 해방군의 투명성이 필요함을 중국 상대국 장관에게 강조해왔다고 미국측에 알려 줬다. 동시에 김 국장은 만일 미합중국과 선린관계의 국가들이 군비 경쟁에 박차를 가한다면, 중국은 험하게 반응 할 것이라고 경고하였다. 그런 이유로 일본이 F-22 전투기를 조달하지 않았다는 뉴스는 반가운 소식이라고 김 국장은 말하였다. 그는 중·러 관계에서의 난제를 지목하면서, 미국과 동맹국들이 중국과 러시아를 더욱 친밀한 관계로 몰아갈 수있는 효과를 낳을 여러 행동을 취하지 않도록 주의를 해야한다며 충고하였다.

16.(비밀) 중국의 군사력 증강으로 일본과 러시아가 똑같이 군사력을 키우도록 부축일 수있다는 논지를 거론하며, 전 실장은 그러한 변화가 미국의 아시아 전략에 가져올 영향은 무엇이며, 미국이 그런 시나리오에서 취할 대책은 무엇인지 물었다. 쉰 수석 부차관보는 미국이 오늘날 취하고 있는 전략은 단지 중국을 대해 신중을 기하자는 것이라고 대답하였다. 그는 과거에는 한미 그리고 미일 동명은 역내에 소련 군사의 증강에 의해 필요해왔다고 지적하였다. 또 다른 아시아  군비경쟁을 예방할 수있는 방법이 있는지는 군사전략에 대한 질문 보다는 외교에 관한 질문이라고 해야 할 것이라고 쉰은 제안하였다. 그는 종국에 정전 협정을 대체할 거라는 평화 메커니즘의 가능성 논의는 11월 연례안보협의회 의제상에 중요한 주제가 될 듯하다고 예측하였다.

===== 제15차 안보정책구상회의 =====

17.(민감하지만미분류) 미국과 한국의 대표단은 안보정책구상회의를 39차 안보협의회의 이전에 갖기로 의견을 모았고, 원칙적으로 제15차 안보정책구상회의는 10월 8일 혹은 그 즈음에 남한의 제주도에서 개최할 것임을 합의하였다.

===== 맺음말 =====

18.(민감하지만미분류) 맺음말로 쉰 수석 부차관보는 한국의 국방과 한미동맹 유지관리를 위해서 각자의 경력을 바쳐 헌신해준데 대해 한국 대표단에 감사하였다. 당신은 한국을 강하고 안전하게 지키고 있다고 그는 말하였다. 함께 논의한 핵심적인 모든 동맹사안―작전통제권, 정전 관리책임, 용산기지이전사업, 연합토지관리계획 목적의 방위비분담금, 그리고 미국과 한국의 군사 변환 등은―긴밀하게 통합 되어있으며, 양측은 해당 사안들에 대해 공조할 필요가 있다고 지적하였다. 그는 논의된 또 다른 한 묶음 사안인 이라크, 아프간, 레바논 그리고 중국 군사력에 대한 논의는 테러리즘부터 부상하는 중국의 군사적 야망에 이르기 까지 한미동맹이 세계 곳곳의 위협과 잠재적 위협을 다루는 세계적인 동반자 관계라는 점에서 역시 관련되어 있다고 지적하였다. 그가 펀치볼 국립공원을 7살 맏아들과 함께 방문했던 것을 회상하면서, 쉰 수석 부차관보는 당일 방문은 한미동맹의 관리가 매우 심각한 사업이라는 점을 더욱 상기시켰다고 말하였다. 미래에 우리의 아들 딸들이 같은 종류의 끔찍한 희생을 치러야 하는 상황을 피하기 위해 반드시 함께 협력해야만 한다고 말하였다. 또한 덧붙이길: 바로 그 점이 우리의 노고를 지속시킨다.

19.(민감하지만미분류) 맺음말로 전 실장은 이번 회의의 결과에 매우 만족하였다고 발언하였다. 한미동맹은 정녕 서로 연결되어있다고 확인하였고, 또한 미국과 한국의 동맹단원은 //“오케스트라를 지휘하려면”// 해당 쟁점사안들을 계속 해결해 나가야만 한다고 제안하였다. 이번 회의에서 가장 큰 수확은 향후 쉰 수석 차관보와 매우 솔직한 협의를 갖을 수 있겠다는 인식이라고 말하면서 마감하였다.

===== 참가자 목록 =====

20.(미분류) 미국 참가자 목록:
Mr. James Shin, Prin Dep Asst Secretary of Defense, APSA, OSD 
Mr. David Sedney, Dep Asst Secretary of Defense, APSA, OSD 
MajGen Frank A. Panter, Jr., CJ5, USFK 
MajGen Thomas Conant, PACOM J5 
Ms. Mary Beth Morgan, Senior Korea Country Director, APSA, OSD 
LTC Michael Finnegan, Special Assistant, APSA, OSD 
Mr. David Helvey, APSA, OSD 
Mr. Brendan Kelly, APSA, OSD 
MAJ Dave Gigliotti, Korea Desk Officer, U.S. JCS 
Col Robert Gardner, Deputy Chief C5 Policy, CFC 
Mr. David Wolff, Pol-Mil Chief, DOS/AMEMB Seoul 
COL Richard Parker, Chief Future Operations G35, EU.S.A 
Col Chris "C-DIN" DiNenna, Chief, Strategy & Policy Division, 
J5-J, USFK 
COL Kevin Madden, Chief Joint U.S. Military Affairs 
Group-Korea 
LTC Ernest C. Lee, PACOM J51 
Col Eugene Yim, Air Attach American Embassy, Seoul 
COL Daniel J. Russell, Assistant Chief of Staff, Engineer, 
USFK 
Mr. David Rathgeber, Special Advisor to Judge Advocate, USFK 
Mr. Robert Mounts, Special Assistant to Deputy CDR for SOFA, 
USFK 
LTC Steve Gransback, Deputy Chief Policy Branch, J5-J, USFK 
Maj Rich "Psycho" McGlamory, Chief Int'l Relations, J5-J, USFK 
Mr. Kim, Jang Wook, Command Interpreter 
한국 참가자 목록:
Dr. Jeon Jei Guk, Deptuy Minister of Defense for Policy, MND 
Dr. Kim, Kyou-hyun, Dir General, Int'l Defese Policy Bureau, 
MND 
Mr. Hwang Seung Hyun, Senior Coord., Security Cooperation, 
MOFAT 
RADM Kim Joong Ryun, Director Strategy & Plans, ROK JCS 
COL Song Seung Jong, Director, U.S. Policy Division, MND 
COL Park Sang Ryool, Director USFK Base Relocation Team, MND 
LTC Kim Kyong Ok, Action Officer, U.S. Policy Division, MND 
LTC Kong Pyong Won, Deputy Director, U.S. Policy Team, MND 
COL Park Chan Joo, Chief CIWG, MND 
Mr. Lee Hong Yup, First Secretary, NA Division III, MOFAT 
CAPT Choo Hyong Kyu, ROKN 
1LT Yoo Jae In, Interpreter, MND 
Mr. Lee Jeong Kyu, Director 3rd Div, NA Bureau, MOFAT 
MR. Chun Young Hee, First Secretary, ROK Embassy, Washington 
D.C. 
2LT Min Jong Ki, Incoming Interpreter, MND

21.(미분류) 쉰 수석 부차관보와 주한미군 기획참모부는 지 전문을 승인하였다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/7/07seoul2556|프와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전제를 금지합니다.

===== 바깥고리 =====
  - [[http://www.vop.co.kr/A00000301205.html| 합참 수뇌부가 직접 사고시간 조작해]] //민중의소리//
===== 원본 및 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07seoul2556.rtf>
S E C R E T SEOUL 002556 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/08/2017 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PREL [External Political Relations], MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: REPORT ON 14TH U.S.-ROK SECURITY POLICY INITIATIVE 
MEETING (SPI-14) 
 
Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1.  (S) SUMMARY:  The 14th Security Policy Initiative meeting 
(SPI-14) was held on July 27 in Hawaii.  OSD/APSA Principal 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense James Shinn headed the 
U.S. delegation.  The Korean delegation was led by Dr. Jeon 
Jei Guk, Deputy Minister of Defense for Policy, Ministry of 
National Defense (MND).  The atmospherics were good and the 
meeting provided ample opportunities for rapport building in 
official and social settings.  The agenda was less 
contentious than had been the case in previous SPI meetings. 
Highlights of the meeting were as follows: 
 
-- Korean Hostage Crisis: PDASD Shinn expressed concern for 
the 23 Koreans taken hostage by the Taliban in Afghanistan on 
July 20th and passed a letter to DM Jeon from the SECDEF 
offering all appropriate U.S. assistance. 
 
-- Wartime OPCON: The U.S. briefed the Strategic 
Implementation Plan (STP), signed on June 28, which lays out 
the tasks to be completed before the April 17, 2012 
transition of wartime operational control.  The exercise 
program was identified as "the critical path" and the ROK 
budget commitment "the critical input," to that effort.  The 
ROK side promised to provide a brief on MND's budget plan at 
the next SPI. 
 
-- Armistice Maintenance: The ROK delegation gave a briefing 
on the "Draft Roadmap Outline" for resolution of the 
Armistice maintenance responsibilities issue.  Both sides 
expressed satisfaction with the work of the Senior Level 
Working Group.  They agreed to endorse the outline and 
instructed the working group to finalize the roadmap in time 
for the 2007 Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) on November 
¶7. 
 
-- Alliance Training/Readiness: PDASD Shinn expressed 
appreciation for the good efforts MND had made over the 
summer to address U.S. alliance training and readiness 
concerns.  Jeon acknowledged the next step was to formalize 
and extend the arrangement with a memorandum of 
understanding.  PDASD Shinn agreed those details would best 
be worked out at the USAF-ROKAF level, but stressed that the 
U.S. military considered it vitally important the two air 
forces develop a system that would no longer compromise 
readiness and training. The issue need to be resolved 
quickly. 
 
-- USFK Realignment: The ROK delegation briefed that the 
Yongsan Relocation and Land Partnership plans (YRP/LPP) were 
moving forward -- with demolition of the old buildings on the 
land 99 percent completed and the first new buildings planned 
for construction in 2008.  The U.S. side expressed overall 
satisfaction with the progress being made, but pointing to 
the summary opinion issued by the National Assembly at the 
end of 2006, PDASD Shinn strongly cautioned that the ROK 
needed to come up with a viable way around the opinion that 
SMA funds could no longer be used for LPP. 
 
-- U.S. Army Transformation: The U.S. delegation reiterated, 
from SPI-13, that transformation is a positive development, 
and will result in enhanced warfighting capability on the 
peninsula.  The U.S. delegation further expressed concern 
over erroneous headlines in the Korean media that misled the 
Korean public into believing that the EUSA Headquarters would 
"remain on the Korean Peninsula." The U.S. side explained 
that EUSA transformation would result in a warfighting 
Operational Command Post (OCP) on the peninsula, while the 
Main Command Post (MCP) would be located in Hawaii. The ROK 
side said it understood and offered to closely coordinate on 
any press guidance or press talking points that it was 
developing on the issue of EUSA transformation.  In addition 
the ROK offered to brief the U.S. on ROK JCS transformation 
at the next SPI. 
 
 
-- Security Cooperation: The ROK side briefed the U.S. on the 
status of ROK military deployments in Iraq, Afghanistan and 
Lebanon, where the 350 person Dong Myung Unit had been 
dispatched on July 19.  DM Jeon said the ROK would make a 
decision in September on whether it would extend the 
deployment of its Zaytun unit in Iraq.  The ROK delegation 
was unsure how the kidnapping of its citizens in Ghazni would 
impact its role in Afghan reconstruction. 
 
-- China Military Power Report: DM Jeon responded to the 
DOD's 2007 China Military Power report by stating that the 
shift in China's military posture made it more likely that 
China could involve itself on the Korean Peninsula in the 
name of border security.  MND International Defense Policy DG 
Kim Kyou-hyun said China was taking a more "active, 
aggressive, even offensive" stance militarily.  All agreed it 
was important to encourage Beijing to be more transparent 
regarding its plans for military build-up. 
 
-- The meeting concluded with both sides agreeing that many 
of the alliance issues discussed were inter-related and 
therefore needed to be worked in concert with one another. 
Both delegations agreed to hold the next SPI (SPI-15) on 
Cheju Island in October before the 39th SCM meeting. END 
SUMMARY 
 
------------------------------ 
KOREAN HOSTAGES IN AFGHANISTAN 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) On July 27, 2007, U.S. and Korean interagency 
delegations led by Dr. Jeon Jei Guk, Deputy Minister of 
Defense for Policy, Ministry of National Defense (MND) and 
OSD/APSA Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Jim 
Shinn met at the Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies in 
Honolulu for the 14th U.S.-ROK Security Policy Initiative 
meeting (SPI-14).  PDASD Shinn opened the meeting by 
expressing U.S. concern for the 23 Koreans taken hostage by 
the Taliban in Afghanistan on July 20th and condolences for 
the death of the leader of the group, Pastor Bae Hyung-kyu. 
(Note: Another member of the group was shot by the Taliban a 
few days later).  PDASD Shinn then passed a letter to DM Jeon 
from Secretary of Defense Gates expressing sadness at the 
loss of life and offering all possible U.S. assistance in 
securing the release of the remaining hostages.  DM Jeon 
replied that the South Korean Government greatly appreciated 
the assistance and concern of the U.S. Government. 
 
--------------------------------- 
WORDS OF SUPPORT FOR THE ALLIANCE 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) DM Jeon and Rear Admiral Kim Joong-ryun, Director of 
Strategy and Plans for the ROK JCS, both referred to the 54 
anniversary of the end of the Korean War as reason to pay 
tribute to the strong bond between the U.S. and the ROK.  DM 
Jeon said he had visited the National Memorial Cemetery of 
the Pacific (Punchbowl Cemetery) the day before, where he had 
seen for himself how the United States honors those who have 
made the ultimate sacrifice.  RADM Kim said he had bowed his 
head in remembrance of the U.S. allies who had given their 
lives in the Korean War.  "We are allies bonded by blood and 
with mutual trust in our hearts," Admiral Kim said.  Dr. Kim 
Kyou-hyun, Director General of MND's International Policy 
Bureau, who was making his last appearance at SPI before 
being reassigned to the Korean Embassy in Washington, stated 
that he had witnessed a recent strengthening of ROK-U.S. 
alliance relations, commenting metaphorically that there had 
been very cloudy skies during the last SPI session held in 
Honolulu, but that the state of alliance relations had 
improved so much that SPI-14 was blessed by sunny skies. 
PDASD Shinn thanked the Korean delegation for its strong 
support for the alliance, noting that their comments were 
 
firm reminders that maintenance of the U.S.-ROK Alliance is a 
serious business, and that we must continue to keep the 
alliance strong so that other young men and women will never 
have to make the same terrible sacrifice. 
 
--------------------------- 
TRANSITION OF WARTIME OPCON 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) After formally welcoming PDASD Shinn and DASD Sedney 
to their first SPI, DM Jeon expressed his concurrence with 
the agenda and invited the U.S. delegation to begin its 
presentation on the status of planning for the April 17, 2012 
transition of wartime operational control.  Colonel Robert 
Gardner, Deputy Chief of C5 Policy from the Combined Forces 
Command (CFC), described the Strategic Implementation Plan 
(STP), signed on June 28, as a comprehensive plan that lays 
out the strategic tasks that need to be undertaken to ensure 
that the alliance will remain fully capable and ready to 
deter aggression after OPCON transition has occurred.  He 
pointed to the training and exercise program as the key 
element in that effort and informed the group that both sides 
were now working to stand up the implementation secretariat. 
MajGen Frank Panter, the USFK J5, also stressed that the 
exercise program was the "critical path" to a successful 
transition because it was the mechanism that would test the 
new concepts, structures and procedures being put in place. 
DM Jeon complimented the team of military experts who wrote 
the STP for creating a well-developed concept and planning 
document.  Jeon noted STP implementation began a week after 
STP signature with emphasis on MND support for budget and 
other requirements.  Jeon said the ROK Armed Forces are 
working towards matching STP tasks to requirements for ROK 
Joint Forces Command (JFC) establishment.  He said it was now 
important to work closely together to implement it.  DASD 
Sedney pointed out that an appropriate commitment to 
implementation in the MND budget was a "critical input" to 
that process.  In response, DM Jeon pledged that MND would 
brief its budget plan (the same plan it will submit to the 
National Assembly) to the U.S. delegation at the next SPI. 
PDASD Shinn concluded the OPCON discussion by saying the U.S. 
team looked forward to proceeding toward implementation with 
their ROK counterparts.  Jeon replied that the tasks were 
numerous but that he believed the work would be concluded on 
time for the 2012 transition date. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
ARMISTICE MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) MOFAT North America III Division Director Lee 
Jeong-kyu gave a briefing on the "Draft Roadmap Outline" for 
resolution of the Armistice maintenance responsibilities 
issue.  DM Jeon said he was very satisfied with the work to 
date of the Senior Level Working Group on Armistice 
Maintenance Responsibilities and agreed to endorse to the 
outline for the roadmap.  He asked that the group continue 
developing the roadmap with two things in mind:  1) The 
eventual roadmap should be as concise and flexible as 
possible, and; 2) It should be completed in time to report it 
to the 2007 Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) on November 7 
in Seoul.  DM Jeon, MOFAT Senior Coordinator for Security 
Cooperation Hwang Seung-hyun, and MND DG Kim all voiced 
objections to the U.S. proposal for including a specific 
implementation deadline in the roadmap, saying there was not 
enough time before the SCM to establish such a firm deadline. 
 The ROK side also resisted the suggestion that at a minimum 
a study deadline be set to demonstrate to the U.S. and ROK 
defense leadership at the SCM that progress was being made. 
 
¶6.  (C) NOTE: During the break that followed the morning 
session, MOFAT Senior Coordinator Hwang explained to the 
Embassy POL-MIL Chief that progress in the Six-Party Talks 
had raised hopes and political rhetoric over the possibility 
 
of establishing a peace mechanism to replace the Armistice. 
Given that political climate, the Blue House wanted to avoid 
generating complicating headlines about changes being made in 
the maintenance of the Armistice, Hwang explained.  He 
stressed that the ROKG still fully intended to work out an 
acceptable solution on Armistice maintenance, and assured 
that it had no problem continuing that discussion through the 
Senior Level Working Group.  Upon returning to Seoul, MND 
officials contacted the J5 to say the ROK had further come 
around to accepting the U.S. proposal that the Senior Level 
Working Group discuss the setting of a study deadline.  END 
NOTE. 
 
------------------------------- 
ALLIANCE TRAINING AND READINESS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) PDASD Shinn expressed appreciation to DM Jeon for the 
good efforts MND had made during the summer to address the 
alliance training and readiness concerns (focused primarily 
on air space management and air to ground training ranges) 
the U.S. and ROK militaries had been grappling with for 
nearly three years.  DM Jeon reported that the Jik-do scoring 
equipment installation began 2 days prior to the SPI (July 
25th) and he expected completion by the end of August. He 
stressed the need for a Memorandum of Understanding for 
Jik-do and that it should be dealt with at the ROKAF and 7AF 
level.  Regarding air space management, Jeon acknowledged the 
next step was to formalize and extend the arrangement beyond 
the initial 90 day agreement by preparing a memorandum of 
understanding.  He stated that the ROK requested more 
information on 7AF training requirements at SPI-13 and the 
U.S. has not provided the information.  He continued by 
adding that it is important for the ROK to have this 
information to assess the U.S. airspace requests.  Jeon was 
eager, however, to suggest that the task be handed back to 
air force experts, as it largely involved working out the 
technical details.  He said that maintenance costs and 
responsibilities at Pilsung Range remained to be resolved, 
but stated that these issues should never come up to the 
level of the SPI.  The ROK side raised the Electronic Warfare 
(EW) issue and asked for a U.S. plan to solve the EW training 
shortfall.  Maj Gen Panter stated U.S. EW equipment had been 
removed from Pilsung and will not be replaced.  DG Kim added 
the concern that "in many cases the U.S. had failed to notify 
the ROK in a timely manner when bringing U.S. planes in from 
off the Korean Peninsula for training."  He said the ROK 
wanted to support the training of those off-Peninsula assets, 
but that better coordination was needed.  The U.S. delegation 
responded by explaining that unexpected changes in training 
needs sometimes prevented timely notice, but pledged to 
continue working with ROKAF counterparts to further improve 
coordination and joint use of training facilities.  PDASD 
Shinn stated that these issues when identified should be 
resolved quickly so that they do not need to be addressed at 
the SPI.  He stressed, that it was a vitally important that 
the two air forces develop a system that would no longer 
compromise readiness and training. 
 
---------------- 
USFK REALIGNMENT 
---------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Turning to USFK realignment and the Yongsan 
Relocation and Land Partnership plans (YRP/LPP), the ROK 
delegation provided the following progress report. 
 
-- 1 household out of 222 remains on the land.  The owner is 
seeking compensation way over the market price, the ROKG is 
therefore preparing for criminal prosecution. 
-- Demolition of the old buildings on the land is 99 percent 
completed.  Disposal of the waste 60 percent completed. 
-- Cultural excavation is 40 percent completed.  Will be 
completed by end of August. 
 
-- Landfill of Parcel 1 is 11 percent completed. 
-- The contract for development of Parcel K will be awarded 
in August/September. 
-- The first new buildings to be constructed include the HQ 
and four critical facilities (hospital, commo, etc.) 
-- Work continues on the critical task of building a 
construction access road with a June 2008 target date for 
completion. 
-- The Project Management Consortium (PMC) is up and running. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) USFK Engineer and Assistant Chief of Staff Colonel 
Dan Russell summarized the situation by saying "The earth is 
now moving and the buildings will soon be going up."  Both DM 
Jeon and PDASD Shinn thanked Colonel Russell and his Korean 
counterpart, Colonel Park Sang-ryool, Director of the USFK 
Base Relocation Team at MND, for their efforts in bringing 
realignment into the implementation stage. 
 
------- 
SMA-LPP 
------- 
 
¶10.  (C) During the discussion of USFK realignment, DASD 
Sedney raised U.S. concerns over the summary opinion issued 
by the National Assembly at the end of 2006 which directs 
that the ROK Special Measures Agreement (SMA) burdensharing 
contribution not be used for funding construction under the 
LPP.  DASD Sedney stated that the USG had been clear all 
along that the funding for LPP would come from the USFK 
budget which was composed of two funding streams. SMA would 
constitute one of the two funding streams for the completion 
of the LPP (the other being U.S. MILCON).  He said this 
serious problem had arisen because the ROKG had failed to 
adequately explain that understanding to the National 
Assembly.  DM Jeon replied that he recognized the U.S. 
concerns and hoped an appropriate solution would be worked 
out via diplomatic channels.  He firmly argued, however, that 
the ROKG did provide adequate explanations to the National 
Assembly, the media and the ROK public.  He said that did 
not, however, prevent the National Assembly from exercising 
its will in this matter.  MOFAT Senior Coordinator Hwang 
stated that it was the ROKG position that a more stable and 
transparent SMA process was needed to address the problem 
because the summary opinion of the National Assembly could 
not be withdrawn.  He added that the U.S. and ROK negotiators 
must agree on a way forward by the end of this year.  PDASD 
Shinn thanked the ROK delegation for its comments, but warned 
that unless the ROKG found a way to reverse or work around 
the instructions of the National Assembly, the alliance was 
headed for a big problem over the SMA for LPP issue.  He 
pointed out that if the U.S. and ROK accepted the summary 
opinion, implementation of the USFK realignment plans that 
are now underway could grind to a halt. 
 
------------------------ 
U.S. ARMY TRANSFORMATION 
------------------------ 
 
¶11.  (C) The U.S. delegation reiterated, from SPI-13, that 
transformation is a positive development, and will result in 
enhanced warfighting capability on the peninsula.  The ROK 
side expressed satisfaction and understanding of U.S. Army 
transformation objectives.  MajGen Panter expressed concern 
over erroneous headlines in the Korean media that were 
misleading the Korean public into believing that the EUSA 
headquarters would "remain on the Korean Peninsula."  That is 
only half true, Panter warned, explaining once again that 
while the warfighting Operational Command Post (OCP), a 
2-star billet would remain in Korea, the EUSA Main Command 
Post (MCP), would be headed by a 3-star general most likely 
in Honolulu.  Thus in time of crisis the 3-star general could 
come to Korea to fight the war.  Panter added that the OCP 
will be a true warfighting headquarters on peninsula that 
will have more capability than the current EUSA headquarters. 
 
 These changes are aligned with the U.S. Army's global 
transformation objectives and plans, Panter concluded. 
Indicating that the ROKG understood what had been briefed to 
them, RADM Kim thanked the U.S. delegation for providing 
further clarification on the issue and offered that in the 
future the ROK would closely consult with the U.S. on any 
press guidance or talking points regarding EUSA 
transformation.  He proposed that the ROK side in turn 
provide a briefing on ROK JCS transformation at the next SPI. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
SECURITY COOPERATION IN IRAQ, AFGHANISTAN, LEBANON 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶12.  (C) Colonel Song Seung-jong, Director of the U.S. Policy 
Division at MND, briefed the U.S. delegation on the status of 
ROK military deployments in Iraq, Afghanistan and Lebanon. 
Col Song focused his briefing on the recent dispatch of ROK 
forces to UNIFIL.  He explained that the Dong Myung (Light 
From The East) Unit was a 350 person infantry battalion with 
its own medical and engineering capabilities that had been 
dispatched on July 19 to an area just north of Tyre.  DM Jeon 
addressed the issue of the ROK Zaytun troop dispatch to Iraq, 
stating that the ROKG would make a decision in September on 
whether it would extend that deployment for another year.  He 
assured the U.S. delegation that the ROK was fully aware of 
the importance of the ROK presence in Iraq and would "be very 
careful" when making its decision on extension.  He also 
stated that the ROKG would give the USG prior notification 
before going to the National Assembly. 
 
¶13.  (C) During a brief follow-on discussion of the situation 
in Afghanistan, the ROK delegation gave no indication how the 
kidnapping of 23 of its citizens by the Taliban would impact 
its future role in that country, but off-line their consensus 
view was that the ROK would recall all of its troops from 
Afghanistan by the end of the year, as that had been the 
decision of the ROK government even before the hostage crisis 
occurred.  No one was sure how the crisis would impact the 
ROK plan to replace its medical and engineering troops in 
Afghanistan with a civilian equivalent, but all expressed 
concern that the killing of more hostages would make it far 
more difficult for the ROKG to convince the public, in an 
election year, that it was safe to send civilians there.  At 
the close of the session on security cooperation, DASD Sedney 
commented to the ROK delegation that the debate in Korea over 
that issue closely mirrored the domestic political debate 
over the future U.S. role in Iraq taking place in the United 
States.  So we know that this is not easy, he said. 
 
--------------------------- 
CHINA MILITARY POWER REPORT 
--------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (S) When PDASD Shinn asked the ROK delegation for its 
views after OSD/APSA David Helvey provided a briefing on the 
Pentagon's 2007 China Military Power report, DM Jeon replied 
that the ROK was watching the modernization of the Chinese 
military with keen interest.  He said the ROK had noticed a 
shift in China's military posture from a passive defensive 
strategy to a more active one.  As a result, it was MND's 
view that there was now an increased chance that China could 
involve itself on the Korean Peninsula in the name of border 
security.  He went on to say that the ROKG was very concerned 
by what it saw because the People's Liberation Army (PLA) was 
clearly pursuing forward and long-range precision strike 
capabilities that would put the entire region within range of 
its new weaponry.  It is important that we actively encourage 
China to become a responsible stakeholder in the 
international community, Jeon urged, and that we remind China 
that greater transparency will actually help to improve 
China's image. 
 
¶15.  (S) DG Kim said that China was taking a more "active, 
 
aggressive, even offensive" stance militarily, and that this 
greatly concerned the ROK.  He informed the U.S. side that 
Defense Minister Kim Jang-soo had stressed the need for PLA 
transparency to his Chinese counterpart during their most 
recent ministerial-level meeting.  At the same time, DG Kim 
warned that China would react badly if countries friendly to 
the United States were to spur on the arms race.  For that 
reason the news that Japan would not be acquiring the F-22 
fighter was welcome news, Kim said.  Pointing to difficulties 
in Sino-Russian relations, he further advised that the U.S. 
and its allies take care not to take actions that would have 
the effect of pushing Russia and China closer together. 
 
¶16.  (S) Picking up on the point that China's military 
buildup could encourage Japan and Russia to do the same, Jeon 
asked what effect such changes would have on the U.S. 
strategy in Asia and what countermeasures the U.S. would be 
likely to take in such a scenario.  PDASD Shinn replied that 
what the U.S. was doing today was the only prudent strategy 
to have towards China.  He pointed out that in the past, the 
U.S.-ROK and U.S.-Japan alliances had been necessitated by 
the Soviet military buildup in the region.  Whether there is 
a way to prevent a similar another Asian arms race is more a 
question for diplomacy than for military strategy, Shinn 
suggested.  He predicted that discussion of a possible peace 
mechanism to eventually replace the Armistice would likely be 
an important topic on the agenda for the SCM in November. 
 
------ 
SPI-15 
------ 
 
¶17.  (SBU) The U.S. and ROK delegations agreed to hold the 
next SPI (SPI-15) before the 39th SCM meeting and agreed, in 
principle, that SPI-15 would be held on the South Korean 
island of Cheju on or around October 8. 
 
--------------- 
CLOSING REMARKS 
--------------- 
 
¶18.  (SBU) In his closing remarks, PDASD Shinn thanked the 
members of the Korean delegation for dedicating their careers 
to the defense of Korea and the maintenance of the U.S.-ROK 
Alliance.  You have kept Korea strong and safe, he said.  He 
noted that all of the key alliance issues they had discussed 
-- OPCON, AMR, YRP, the SMA for LPP issue, and U.S. and ROK 
military transformation -- were closely integrated, and that 
the two sides needed to work these issues together.  He 
pointed to the other batch of issues discussed -- Iraq, 
Afghanistan, Lebanon and the discussion of Chinese military 
power -- as also being related in the sense that the U.S.-ROK 
Alliance was truly a global partnership that addressed 
threats and potential threats around the world from terrorism 
to rising Chinese military ambitions.  Recalling a visit he 
had made to the Punchbowl Cemetery with his 7-year old son, 
PDASD Shinn said he had been further reminded on that day 
that management of the alliance is a very serious business. 
We must work together to avoid having to ask our young men 
and women to make those same kinds of horrible sacrifices in 
the future, Shinn said, adding:  It is that which sustains 
our efforts. 
 
¶19.  (SBU) In his closing remarks, DM Jeon stated that he was 
very satisfied with the results of the meeting.  He 
acknowledged that alliance issues were indeed very much 
inter-related, and suggested the U.S. and ROK alliance teams 
should therefore continue to work those issues as if they 
were "conducting an orchestra."  He concluded by saying the 
biggest thing he would take away from the meeting was the 
realization that he would be able to have very candid 
discussions with PDASD Shinn in the future. 
 
---------------- 
 
PARTICIPANT LIST 
---------------- 
 
¶20.  (U) U.S. Attendee List: 
 
Mr. James Shin, Prin Dep Asst Secretary of Defense, APSA, OSD 
Mr. David Sedney, Dep Asst Secretary of Defense, APSA, OSD 
MajGen Frank A. Panter, Jr., CJ5, USFK 
MajGen Thomas Conant, PACOM J5 
Ms. Mary Beth Morgan, Senior Korea Country Director, APSA, OSD 
LTC Michael Finnegan, Special Assistant, APSA, OSD 
Mr. David Helvey, APSA, OSD 
Mr. Brendan Kelly, APSA, OSD 
MAJ Dave Gigliotti, Korea Desk Officer, U.S. JCS 
Col Robert Gardner, Deputy Chief C5 Policy, CFC 
Mr. David Wolff, Pol-Mil Chief, DOS/AMEMB Seoul 
COL Richard Parker, Chief Future Operations G35, EU.S.A 
Col Chris "C-DIN" DiNenna, Chief, Strategy & Policy Division, 
J5-J, USFK 
COL Kevin Madden, Chief Joint U.S. Military Affairs 
Group-Korea 
LTC Ernest C. Lee, PACOM J51 
Col Eugene Yim, Air Attach American Embassy, Seoul 
COL Daniel J. Russell, Assistant Chief of Staff, Engineer, 
USFK 
Mr. David Rathgeber, Special Advisor to Judge Advocate, USFK 
Mr. Robert Mounts, Special Assistant to Deputy CDR for SOFA, 
USFK 
LTC Steve Gransback, Deputy Chief Policy Branch, J5-J, USFK 
Maj Rich "Psycho" McGlamory, Chief Int'l Relations, J5-J, USFK 
Mr. Kim, Jang Wook, Command Interpreter 
 
ROK Attendee List: 
 
Dr. Jeon Jei Guk, Deptuy Minister of Defense for Policy, MND 
Dr. Kim, Kyou-hyun, Dir General, Int'l Defese Policy Bureau, 
MND 
Mr. Hwang Seung Hyun, Senior Coord., Security Cooperation, 
MOFAT 
RADM Kim Joong Ryun, Director Strategy & Plans, ROK JCS 
COL Song Seung Jong, Director, U.S. Policy Division, MND 
COL Park Sang Ryool, Director USFK Base Relocation Team, MND 
LTC Kim Kyong Ok, Action Officer, U.S. Policy Division, MND 
LTC Kong Pyong Won, Deputy Director, U.S. Policy Team, MND 
COL Park Chan Joo, Chief CIWG, MND 
Mr. Lee Hong Yup, First Secretary, NA Division III, MOFAT 
CAPT Choo Hyong Kyu, ROKN 
1LT Yoo Jae In, Interpreter, MND 
Mr. Lee Jeong Kyu, Director 3rd Div, NA Bureau, MOFAT 
MR. Chun Young Hee, First Secretary, ROK Embassy, Washington 
D.C. 
2LT Min Jong Ki, Incoming Interpreter, MND 
 
¶21.  (U) PDASD Shinn, DASD Sedney and USFK J-5 have cleared 
this message. 
VERSHBOW
</file>