^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  배포일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  07SEOUL1893  |  2007-06-22 04:49  |  2011-08-30 01:44  |  기밀  |  서울대사관  |  {{tag>MARR MCAP PARM PREL KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 롤리스 국방부 차관보, 외교통상부, 청와대와 한미 동맹 논의 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 001893 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 06/22/2017 
태그: MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), MCAP(([Military Capabilities])), PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), KS(([Korea (South)] ))
제 목: 롤리스 국방부 부차관, 외교통상부, 청와대와 한미 동맹 논의
참조: [[07seoul1852|SEOUL 1852]] 
비분류: 정치 참사관 대리대사 브라이언 맥피터스  근거 1.4 (b,d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/08/05 20:59//
===== 요점 =====

1.(기밀) 요점: 6월 7일 방한 중인 리차드 롤리스 국방부 부차관은 아래와 같은 남한 외교통상부와 청와대의 고위급 관계관들과 회동하였다: 윤병세 청와대 통일외교안보정책수석비서관, 조병제 외교통상부 북미국장, 그리고 심윤재 외교통상부 차관보. 이 모든 인사들은 한미동맹관계가 최근 개선되었지만, 미국 공군의 훈련장 요건을 해소할 한국의 여력과 관련된 심각한 사안, 그리고 제2 미 보병사단의 이전 비용을 지불하기 위한 방위비 분담금 사용 여부가 10월 연례안보협의회의를 앞두고 미해결 과제로 남겨져 있다. 조 국장은 한국정부가 6월 1일에 남은 9곳 미국 기지의 조건없는 반환을 수용했다고 분명히 하였다. 그러나 한국은 향후 기지 반환에 적용될 //“재조사 및 타당성 검증”// 절차를 제안할 것이라고 강조하였다. 그는 또한 23일에 완료된 기지 반환과 관련된 주둔군 지휘협정 문서의 공개와 관련 미국의 동의를 요청하였다. 롤리스 부차관은 아프간의 재건에 대한 한국의 공헌의 가치, 그리고 그런 노력에 있어 한국의 계속적인 역할의 중요성을 강조하였다. 대화 상대역 3명 모두는 아프간 재건 요청을 호의적인 시선으로 보고 있지만, 아프간의 남한 병력의 안전이 한국정부의 최우선 과제임을 경고하였다.

2.(기밀) 롤리스 부차관은 제13차 한미 안보정책구상회의 수석대표로써 회의를 주도하는 가운데, 6월 7일에 외교통상부 및 청와대의 남한 고위관계관들과 양자회의를 열었다. 해당논의에서 윤병세 통일외교안보정책수석비서관과 조병제 북미국장, 그리고 외교통상부 차관보 심윤재는 기지반환, 방위비 분담금 동의안, 사격 훈련장, 그리고 아프간에서 한국의 계속적인 바람직한 역할의 필요성 등의 한미동맹 사안에 집중하였다. 롤리스가 만난 한국 관계관들은 아래와 같은 견해를 강조하였다.

===== 한미동맹의 상태 =====

3.(기밀) 윤병세 통일외교안보정책수석비서관은 롤리스 부차관과의 회동을 한미동맹 관계의 개선된 상황을 강조하는데 이용하였다. 그는 한미동맹을 강화시키고, 또한 //“한층 미래 지향적인 동반자 관계”//로 한미동맹을 재정립하도록 기여한 롤리스 부차관의 역할을 거하게 칭송하였다. 미합중국과 한국은 한반도를 훨씬 넘어서는 상호 이해관계를 갖고 있다고 윤 수석은 지적하면서, 전 세계에 다른 중요한 사안들을 협력해서 해결하는 것이 한국과 미국정부 모두의 이해에 해당된다고 덧붙였다. 윤 수석은 전시 작전통제권 이양과 기지반환, 그리고 용산기지이전사업과 연합토지관리계획 등의 최근 동맹관련 진전과, 그에 더해 아프간 및 이라크의 재건상에 상호 노력을 언급하였다. 그리고 향후 주한미군 사령부의 소재지인 평택에서 계획 중인 노무현 대통령의 9월 기공식 행사는 최근 한미관계의 진전을 부각시킬 기회라고 지적하였다. 그는 최근 몇 년간의 치열한 협상 중에 동맹 당사국 모두가 //“많은 피와 땀을 흘렸다”//고 덧붙이면서, 그러나 그 결과는 가치있었고, 신뢰의 수준도 현재 회복되었다고 결론 졌다.

4.(기밀) 롤리스 부차관은 한미동맹을 회복시키는데 진전을 이루었다고 생각을 같이하였다. 그는 남은 문제들이, 예로 한반도상의 미군 조종사들에게 주어진 훈련 기회의 심각한 부족 문제는, 10월 서울에서 갖을 연례안보협의회에서의 게이츠 국방장관과 김장수 한국 국방장관과의 회동이전에 해결 되어야 함을 뒤이어 강조하였다. 윤 수석은 사격장 문제의 심각성을 이해한다고 했다. 그는 한국 공군의 F-16 엔진 결함을 해결하도록 계속적인 미국의 지원을 요청하면서 F-16 쟁점을 계속 제기하였다. 롤리스 부차관은 (공군성 장관실/국제부 브루스 램킨 부차관의 방문을 언급하면서) 시스템 차원의 문제 해결을 위해 한국 공군과 협력할 준비가 되어있지만, 그렇게 하려는데 일부 저항에 부딪쳤다고 응답하였다. 롤리츠 차관보와 윤 수석은 미국과 한국의 국방장관은 2월 두 사람이 회동 당시 훌륭한 출발을 보였다고 생각을 같이하였고, 6월 초 샹그릴라 회담에도 반복되었기에, 두 분의 업무적 관계가 계속해서 긍정적이고 생산적 회동이 되길 바란다는 생각을 나누었다.


===== 기지반환 =====

5.(기밀) 부차관 롤리스의 요청에 따라, 외교통상부 북미국장 조병제는 한국정부가 6월 1일 조건없이 남은 9곳의 주한미군 기지 반환을 수용 했음을 두 사람의 회동에서 분명히 밝혔다. 그러나 조 국장은 주둔군 지휘협정 기지반환 처리상에 반영되었던 당시보다 한국 환경법이 최근 몇 년만에 훨씬 더 엄격해짐에 따라서 미래의 한미동맹에서는 상이한 환경 표준문제를 해결할 필요가 있다고 덧붙였다.  그런 근거에서, 한국정부는 향후에는 여하한 기지 반환에 앞서 일종의 //“재조사 및 타당성 검증”//의 채택을 제안하고 싶다고 말하였다. 롤리스 부차관은 그런 논의 목적의 적절한 채널은 이미 주둔군 지휘협정 창구를 통해 마련되어 있다고 대응하였다.


===== 주둔군 지휘 협정 문서의 공개 =====

6.(기밀) 완료된 기지반환에 관련된 소파 문서에 대한 한국정부의 5월 16일 공개 요청으로 화제를 돌려서, 조태용은 가능한 많은 정보를 일반 대중에게 밝히는 것이 한국정부의 정책이며, 한국정부는 기지 반환 문제에 관하여 여론의 동향을((번역 주:broad trend)) 따르길 바란다고 말하였다. 만일 그렇게 하는데 실패한다면, 미국과 한국이 무언가 감추려 한다는 국회의 의심을 살 것이라고 그는 주장하였다. 조태용은 국회가 요청했던 부속서 A((번역 주:Tab A,2003년 5월 30일 주한미군지위협정 합동위원회에 의하여 승인된 환경정보공유및접근절차 부속서 A[미군반환·공여지환경조사와오염치유협의를위한절차합의서])) 문서를 개인적으로 읽어보았는데, 왜 그 문서들을 일반에게 공개하지 못하는지 어떠한 이유를 생각할 수가 없었다고 말하였다. 그러나 그는 한국의 확정된 정책이 미합중국의 승낙없이 소파 문서를 공개하지 않는 것이기 때문에, 외교통상부는 공식적으로 미국의 동의를 구할 필요가 있다고 덧붙였다.

7.(기밀) 롤리스 부차관은 미국정부는 해당 요청을 매우 심각히 수용하고 있지만, 미국이 다른 국가들과 체결한 소파 협정의 상례를 벗어날 수없다고 대답하였다.  그러므로 해당 요청은 매우 신중히 고려해야할 것이라고 그는 말하였다. 그는 공개되는 문서의 일부는 또 다른 문서를 참조하고 있기 때문에, 초기 요청으로 봇물이 터지게 될 가능성이 농후하다고 또한 지적하였다. 게다가, 환경부가 제출한 해당 문서 중 하나는 미합중국에 반대하는 장광설로써, 주한미군의 형편없는 공여지 관리를 비난하고 있다. 조병제는 그 세 가지 우려사항을 분명히 알고 있지만, 그럼에도 미국이 6월 25~26일  기지반환 및 환경치유 문제에 관한 국회 청문회에 앞서서 문서 공개에 합의해 줄 것을 희망한다고 응답하였다. 조병제는 외교통상부는 만일 미국이 해당 문서의 공개에 합의하지 않는다면, 문서의 핵심요약 내용을 공개하게 될 가능성이 있다고 말하였다.

===== 방위비 분담금 특별협정 =====

8.(기밀) 한국의 //“새로운 방위비 분담방식 제안”//으로 화제를 전환해서, 조 국장은 연합토지관리계획에 근거한 주한미군 시설의 건설 용도로 방위비 분담금 기금 사용을 국회가 금지한 것과 관련해 외교통상부가 제안한 해결책을 면밀히 고려해줄 것을 롤리스 부차관에게 요청하였다. 그는 이번 //“정치적인 문제”//을 해결하는데 미국정부의 도움이 필요하다고 말하였다. 조 국장은 방위비 분담금 특별협정이 한미동맹을 저해하는 반대자들의 도구로 이용되는 게 아니라, 한미동맹 지지의 상징으로 이용되길 원한다고 말하였다. 롤리스 부차관은 정치군사국/안보협상·협정과 고위 참모 로프티스가 조 국장에게 6월 4일에 제공한 제안에 대한 미국의 대응을 제창하면서, 미국정부는 사안의 정치적 민감성을 이해하지만, 본 문제가 외교통상부가 생성한 문제이고 해서, 적절한 해결을 위해서는 외교통상부에 그 책임이 있지, 미국정부가 아니라는 게 미국의 입장이라고 설명하였다.

9.(기밀) 뒤이어진 회동에서, 심 차관보는 한국의 방위비 분담금 제안에 대해 미국의 호의적인 대응을 또한 요청하였다. 롤리스 부차관은((번역 주: No 4.=>미국은 부장관이 있기에, 문제는 한국의 No 4는 ‘부차관보’가 된다. 자세한 내용은 PoirotKr의 트윗으로 날린 바있다 미국식으로 전부 고쳐 놓았기 때문에 한국식 ‘부차관보’로 다시 고쳐야 할지 고민이다)) 그 것은 불가능한 일이란 말로 대응하였는데, 그 이유는 한국정부의 요청은 주한미군이 미국 법을 위반하는 방식으로 기금을 돌려 막으라는 것이기 때문이다. 게다가 미국 의회가 제2보병 사단을 위한 새로운 해외시설 공사에 기금을 출연한다고 동의하는 것은 거의 가능성이 없다고 롤리스는 지적하였다. 연합토지관리계획 협정을 도출할 당시에, 미국은 주한미군 예산이 제2보병 사단의 재배치에 출연할 것이며, 또한 주한미군 예산은 방위비 분담금 특별협정과 미국의 군사·건설비의 두 가지 원천에서 기금을 충당할 것임을 분명히 언급했었다. 롤리스는 만일 한국정부가 방위비 분담금을 제2보병 사단의 재배치에 사용될 수없다는 주장을 계속 고집한다면, 한미동맹은 2008년 무렵에 최악의 상황에 직면할 것이라고 덧붙였다.


===== 아프간 =====

10.(기밀) 롤리스 부차관은 세 명의 모든 고위급 한국 관계관들과의 회동을 아프간 재건에 대한 한국의 기여의 가치, 그리고 2007년 현재의 헌신을 뛰어 넘은 그런 노력에 한 역할을 계속 수행하는 것이 중요함을 강조하는데 사용하였다. 조 국장은 해당 요청은 남한정부 안에서 긍정적으로 검토되고 있으며, 외교통상부는 우즈베키스탄에서 아프간을 잇는 전기 송전시스템을 연결하라는 제안을 심각히 들여다 보고있다고 또한 말하였다. 마지막으로, 아프간 지방재건팀을 주도할 가능성 역시 고려하고 있다고 조 국방은 말하였다. 한국의 가장 큰 우려사항은 안전 문제라고 덧붙이면서, 국회는 한국군이 연말에 아프간에서 철수할 것을 요구하고 있다고 지적하였다.

11.(기밀) 윤 수석은 한국은 아프간 뿐만이 아닌 중앙아시아 전체에서 더 많은 참여를 하길 희망한다고 지적하였다. 그런 관점에서, 청와대는 미국이 제안한 것을 //“심각하게”// 고려하고 있다고 말하였다. 그는 어떤 결정도 내려지지 않았다고 주의를 당부하였지만, 한국이 초기 단계로 아프간에 실태조사 임무 요원을 보낼 뜻임을 드러냈다.

12.(기밀) 당일 나중 무렵에, 심 차관보는 당일 오후에 갖은 협의를 //“아프간 관련 훌륭한 한미 실무급 협의”//라고 일컬으며 칭송하였다. 그는 중앙아시아 5개국 모두의 //“기조”//는 한국과 아프간과의 긴밀한 유대관계를 환영할 것이라는 윤 수석의 논평을 재창하였다. 또한 중앙아시아 지역의 발전과 통합을 돕는데 남한에게 여러 광범위한 기회들이 존재하며, 중앙아시아에 많은 한민족이 거주하고 있음을 지적하였다. 한국군이 더 오래 주둔하는 것이 분명히 가치있지만, 남한의 국내 정치상황은 그 것을 허락하지 않을 것이라고 심윤재는 경고하였다. 2008년과 그 이후에 한국이 어떠한 역할을 수행하던 간에, 보호가 최우선이 될 것이라고 그는 덧붙이면서, 남한은 미국이 한국의 안전을 제공하고, 또한 나토의 국제치안유지군과 한국은 신생관계라며 한국을 도와주길 기대하고 있다고 했다.

13.(기밀) 롤리스 부차관은 대답으로, 기꺼이 안전을 제공하려는, 그러나 재건 기금의 수준이나 한국이 제공하는 전문성을 제공할 수없는 몽골과 같은 다른 국가들과 한국의 파트너십에 대한 가능성을 제기하였다. 세 명의 모든 한국 관계관들은 그런 구상을 심각히 고려하겠다 의사를 비췄다.
//버시바우//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/7/07seoul1893|프와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 바깥고리 =====
  - [[http://www.usfk.mil/usfk/sofa|United States Forces Korea_SOFA Documents]]  //주한미군//
  - [[http://www.state.gov/t/pm/c17194.htm|Office of Security Negotiations and Agreements (PM/SNA)]] //미 국무부//
===== 원본 및 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07SEOUL1893.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001893 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/22/2017 
TAGS: MARR MCAP PARM PREL KS
SUBJECT: DUSD LAWLESS' ALLIANCE MEETINGS WITH MOFAT, BLUE 
HOUSE 
 
REF: SEOUL 1852 
 
Classified By: A/Pol Brian D. McFeeters. Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: On June 7, visiting Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense (DUSD) Richard Lawless met with the following senior 
South Korean officials at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade (MOFAT) and the Blue House:  Senior Secretary to the 
President for National Security Yun Byung-se, MOFAT North 
American Affairs Bureau Director General Cho Byung-jae, and 
MOFAT Deputy Foreign Minister for Political Affairs Shim 
Yoon-joe.  All agreed that U.S.-ROK Alliance relations had 
recently improved but that serious issues related to the ROK 
ability to address U.S. Air Force training range requirements 
and the use of burden sharing funds to pay for the relocation 
of the U.S. 2nd Infantry Division (2ID) remained to be 
resolved prior to the October Security Consultative Meeting 
(SCM).  DG Cho clarified that the ROKG had accepted the 
return of the remaining 9 USFK camps on June 1 without 
conditions, but stressed that the ROK would propose a" 
re-inspection/validation" procedure be adopted for future 
camp returns.  He also requested U.S. concurrence in the 
public release of SOFA documents pertaining to the 23 
completed camp returns.  DUSD Lawless stressed the value of 
the ROK contribution to reconstruction in Afghanistan and the 
importance of a continued ROK role in that effort.  All three 
of his interlocutors indicated that the request was being 
looked at favorably, but warned that security for South 
Korean personnel in Afghanistan would remain the highest 
priority for the ROKG.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (C) While heading the U.S. delegation to the 13th Security 
Policy Initiative (SPI) talks in Seoul (reported reftel), 
DUSD Richard Lawless held bilateral meetings on June 7 with 
three senior South Korean officials at MOFAT and the Blue 
House.  Those discussions, held with Senior Secretary to the 
President for National Security Yun Byung-se, MOFAT North 
American Affairs Bureau Director General Cho Byung-jae, and 
MOFAT Deputy Foreign Minister for Political Affairs Shim 
Yoon-joe, focused on U.S.-ROK Alliance issues, including camp 
returns, the Special Measures Agreement (SMA), the training 
range issue, and the need for the ROK to continue its helpful 
role in Afghanistan.  The ROK officials he met with stressed 
the following points of view: 
 
------------------------------ 
State of the U.S.-ROK Alliance 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) Senior Secretary to the President for National 
Security Yun Byung-se used his meeting with DUSD Lawless to 
highlight the improved state of U.S.-ROK Alliance relations. 
He richly praised DUSD Lawless for his role in strengthening 
the alliance and helping to reshape it into a "more 
future-oriented partnership."  The U.S. and ROK have mutual 
interests that extend far beyond the Korean Peninsula, Yun 
pointed out, adding that it was in the interests of both 
Seoul and Washington to work together to address other 
important issues around the globe.  Yun cited recent alliance 
progress on the transition of wartime operational control 
(OPCON), camp returns, and the Yongsan Relocation and Land 
Partnership plans (YRP/LPP), as well as mutual efforts in the 
reconstruction of Afghanistan and Iraq, and pointed to 
President Roh's planned September groundbreaking ceremony at 
the future USFK headquarters site in Pyeongtaek as an 
opportunity to highlight the recent progress in alliance 
relations.  He added that "a lot of blood had been shed" by 
both alliance partners during contentious negotiations in 
recent years, but concluded that the results had been worth 
it and that a degree of trust had now been restored. 
 
¶4. (C) DUSD Lawless agreed that progress had been made in 
repairing alliance relations.  He went on to stress the hope 
that remaining problems, such as the serious lack of training 
opportunities available to U.S. pilots on the peninsula, be 
resolved before Secretary Gates meets with ROK Minister of 
National Defense Kim Jang-soo at the SCM in Seoul in October. 
 Yun expressed his understanding of the seriousness of the 
issue.  He then raised the F-16 issue by asking for continued 
U.S. assistance in resolving the ROK Air Force's F-16 engine 
parts problem.  DUSD Lawless responded that the U.S. was 
ready to work with the ROK Air Force (citing DAS for SAF/IA 
Bruce Lemkin's recent visit) to fix the systemic problem, but 
was receiving some resistance to doing so.  DUSD Lawless and 
Yun both agreed that the U.S. and ROK defense chiefs had 
gotten off to an excellent start when they met in February, 
and again at the Shangri-la dialogue in early June, and 
shared the hope that their working relationship would 
continue to be a positive and productive one. 
 
------------ 
Camp Returns 
------------ 
 
¶5. (C) At DUSD Lawless' request, MOFAT North American Affairs 
DG Cho Byung-jae clarified in their meeting that the ROKG had 
accepted the return of the remaining 9 USFK camps on June 1 
without conditions.  Cho added, however, that in the future 
the U.S.-ROK Alliance would need to address the problem of 
differing environmental standards as ROK environmental law 
had become far more stringent in recent years than was 
reflected in the SOFA camp return process.  For that reason, 
Cho said the ROKG would likely propose the adoption of some 
sort of "re-inspection/validation" procedure prior to 
accepting any future camps.  DUSD Lawless responded by saying 
that the proper channels for such a discussion already 
existed through SOFA channels. 
 
------------------------- 
Release of SOFA Documents 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Turning to the ROKG's May 16 request for public 
release of SOFA documents relating to the completed camp 
returns, Cho stated that it was the policy of the ROK 
government to disclose as much information to the public as 
possible, and that the ROKG wished to follow that broad trend 
with regard to the camp returns issue.  Failure to do so, he 
argued, would raise speculation within the National Assembly 
that the U.S. and ROK had something to hide.  Cho said he had 
personally read the Tab A documents the National Assembly had 
requested and that he could not think of any reason why they 
should not be made public.  He added, however, that since it 
is the ROK's confirmed policy is not to release SOFA 
documents without the concurrence of the United States, it 
was necessary for MOFAT to formally request that the U.S. 
agree to the release. 
 
¶7. (C) DUSD Lawless replied that the USG was taking the 
request very seriously, but that it could depart from 
established SOFA agreements the U.S. had with other 
countries.  The request would therefore have to be very 
carefully considered, he said.  He also pointed out that 
since some of the documents to be released referred to other 
documents it was likely that the initial request would open 
the flood gates.  Furthermore, one of the documents that had 
been submitted by the Ministry of the Environment was a 
screed against the United States, accusing USFK of poor 
stewardship of the land.  Cho replied that he clearly 
understood all three of those concerns, but that he 
nevertheless hoped the U.S. would agree to the release prior 
to June 25-26 National Assembly hearings on the camp 
return/environmental remediation issue.  Cho stated that 
MOFAT would likely go ahead and release a summary of the 
essence of the documents if the U.S. did not agree to release 
them. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Special Measures Agreement (SMA) 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Turning to the ROK's "Proposal for a New SMA Formula," 
DG Cho asked DUSD Lawless to carefully consider MOFAT's 
proposed solution regarding the National Assembly's 
prohibition against using SMA funds for construction of USFK 
facilities under the Land Partnership Plan (LPP), stating 
that he needed the USG's help in addressing this "political 
problem."  Cho said he wanted the SMA to be used as a symbol 
of support for the U.S.-ROK Alliance, rather than as a tool 
used by opponents of the alliance to undermine that support. 
Echoing the U.S. response to the proposal PM/SNA Senior 
Advisor Loftis had provided to DG Cho on June 4, DUSD Lawless 
explained that while the USG understood the political 
sensitivities involved, the USG position was that it was a 
problem created by MOFAT, and so up to MOFAT, not the U.S. 
Government, to appropriately resolve. 
 
¶9. (C) In a subsequent meeting, Deputy Foreign Minister (DFM) 
Shim also asked that the U.S. respond favorably to the ROK's 
SMA proposal.  DUSD Lawless responded by stating that was an 
impossibility, since the ROKG was asking that USFK move funds 
around in a manner that violated U.S. law.  Furthermore, it 
was highly unlikely that the U.S. Congress would agree to 
fund the overseas construction of new facilities for the 2nd 
Infantry Division (2ID), Lawless pointed out.  At the time 
the LPP Agreement was reached, the U.S. clearly stated that 
the USFK budget would fund the 2ID relocation and that the 
USFK budget derives funding from two sources -- SMA and U.S. 
Mil-Con.  Lawless added that if the ROKG should persist in 
its argument that SMA funds cannot be used to relocate 2ID, 
the U.S.-ROK Alliance would face a worst case scenario 
situation sometime in 2008. 
 
----------- 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
 
¶10. (C) DUSD Lawless used his meetings with all three senior 
ROK officials to stress the value of the ROK contribution to 
reconstruction in Afghanistan and the importance of the 
Republic of Korea continuing to play a role in that effort 
beyond its current 2007 commitment.  DG Cho said the request 
was being viewed positively within the South Korean 
government and that MOFAT was also taking a serious look at 
the proposal to link up an electricity transmission system 
from Uzbekistan to Afghanistan.  Finally, the possibility of 
the ROK leading a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) was 
also being considered, Cho said.  The ROK's biggest concern 
was security, he added, noting that the National Assembly had 
passed legislation requiring the withdrawal of all ROK 
military forces from Afghanistan by the end of the year. 
 
¶11. (C) Senior Secretary Yun pointed out that the ROK wished 
to become more involved not only in Afghanistan, but in 
Central Asia as a whole.  In that context, he said, the Blue 
House was considering what the U.S. had proposed "in a 
serious way."  He cautioned that no decision had been made, 
but revealed that as an initial step the ROK would be sending 
a fact-finding mission to Afghanistan. 
 
¶12. (C) Later in the day, DFM Shim applauded what he termed 
"a great U.S.-ROK working-level discussion on Afghanistan" 
that had taken place that afternoon.  He echoed Yun's comment 
that all five of the Central Asian "stans" would welcome 
closer ties with the ROK and Afghanistan, and that broader 
opportunities existed for South Korea to help in the 
development and integration of the region, noting that there 
are many ethnic Koreans living in Central Asia.  While there 
was clearly value to ROK troops staying longer, Shim warned 
that the domestic political situation in South Korea would 
not allow for that.  Whatever role the ROK does play in 
Afghanistan in 2008 and beyond, protection would be a top 
priority, he added, making it clear that South Korea looked 
to the U.S. to provide that security and to assist the ROK in 
its nascent relationship with NATO's International Security 
Force in Afghanistan (ISAF). 
 
¶13. (C) In his response, DUSD Lawless raised the possibility 
of the ROK partnering with other countries, such as Mongolia, 
that were willing to provide security, but unable to afford 
the level of reconstruction funding and expertise the ROK had 
to offer.  All three ROK officials indicated they would also 
give that idea their serious consideration. 
VERSHBOW
</file>