^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  07SEOUL472  |  2007-02-15 09:32  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PINR PREL ABLD KS KN }}  |
====== 제 목: 자격을 갖춘, 준비된 이명박 선두 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 000472 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 09/08/2016 
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PINR(([Intelligence])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), ABLD(([Buildings and Grounds])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)]))
제 목: 자격을 갖춘, 준비된 이명박 선두
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사.  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/11/07 00:23//
===== 요약 =====

1. (기밀) 요약: 대선 선두 주자 이명박 전 서울 시장은 버시바우 대사와 단둘이 오찬을 함께하였다. 그 자리에서 이명박은 한국의 유권자가 바라는 차기 대통령상은 지역주의에 초점을 맞추기보다는 특히 경제와 같은 정책에 집중하는 효율적인 지도자를 원하고 있다고 설명하였다. 이명박은 대운하 사업을 비롯한 다양한 사업을 동력으로 삼아 한국 경제를 새롭게 도약시킬 뿐만 아니라 한국의 외교 정책도 개선할 거라고 말하였다. 국내 정치용으로 대미·대일 정책을 만들 게 아니라 한미 관계를 “정상화”하고 한일 관계를 개선할 거라고 공언하였다. 대북 경제 원조는 반드시 제한을 두어야만 한다; 북한이 개방하도록 설득하는 일이 우선이다. 이명박은 최근 다른 후보들이(박근혜로 보임) 그를 겨냥한 비방 캠페인을 펼치고 있는데 역효과가 날 거라고 말했다. 왜냐면 자신에 대한 소문이 과거 선거 캠페인에서 모두 뜬소문임이 이미 밝혀졌기 때문이다. 이명박은 대통령 후보로 최고의 적임자인 그의 인기가 금방 흔들릴 공산은 크지 않다고 자신 있게 전망하였다. 요약 끝.

===== 인기의 근원은? =====

2. (기밀) 2월 13일 대선 선두 주자인 이명박 전 서울 시장은 자신의 높은 인기의 원인은(주석: 이명박은 모든 여론 조사에서 다른 모든 후보와 비교해 25% 이상 앞서고 있다. 주석 끝.) 노무현이 변화 요구를 발판으로 삼아 대통령이 된 2002년 이래로 정치 환경이 변화한 결과라고 버시바우 대사에게 말하였다. 유권자들은 이제 경험과 자격을 갖춘 지도자를 원한다. 이명박은 그가 20대 30대 전형적인 진보 유권자를 상대로 한 여론조사에서도 1위인 이유는 젊은이들이 고용 문제와 경제 걱정이 늘고 있기 때문이라고 말하였다. 한나라당 후보가 역사적으로 지지율 5% 이상을 받지 못하는 전라도 호남 지방에서도 높은 지지율을 나오는 것만 봐도 한국이 달라졌다는 것을 시사한다(주석: 일부 여론조사에서 이명박의 전라도 지역 지지율이 36%까지 나오고 있다. 주석 끝.)

3. (기밀) 이명박은 자신의 전라도 지역 지지율이 증발할 거라는 생각을 일축하였다. 그의 주장에 따르면 이번 선거는 지역주의보다는 한국 경제의 미래가 더 중요하므로 다르다는 것이다. 이명박은 김대중 전 대통령의 영향력이 가시고 있으므로 호남에서 지역주의 요인이 덜 중요해졌다고 덧붙였다. 이명박은 미래에 대한 비전을 갖춘 진보 후보가 없어서 그가 호남에서 계속 높은 지지율을 만끽할 거로 확신하고 있다.

===== 대외 정책 =====

4. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 이 후보의 가장 큰 장점은 확실히 경제 문제에 대한 기조에서 나온다고 언급하면서 이명박의 외교 정책도 이 후보의 인기에 기여할지 물었다. 이명박은 많은 이들이 노무현 대통령이 한국의 국제 위상을 지켜내지 못했고 한미 관계와 한일 관계 관리도 성공하지 못했다고 믿는다고 응대하였다. 노무현이 실패한 원인은 외교 정책을 국내 정치용으로 이용했기 때문이다. 그러므로 자신이 당선되면 미국과 일본과의 관계 “정상화”에 힘쓸 것이다. 이명박은 한미 관계 문제에 대해 무조건 한미동맹을 지지하는 노년층과 한미동맹을 현대화하고 재정립하길 원하는 젊은 층 사이 이견이 있다고 말하였다. 버시바우 대사는 최근 몇 년에 걸쳐 한미 관계를 현대화하는 여러 조치를 밟아왔다고 설명했다. 예로 전시 작전권 이양 합의나 미군 기지를 도시 중심부에서 이전하여 통폐합하는 합의 등이다. 그러므로 한미 관계가 자연스레 더 균형을 잡게 되었다고 버시바우 대사는 강조하였다.

5. (기밀) 이명박은 일본 문제와 관련 일본이 국내 정치에 사로잡혀 6자 회담에 건설적으로 참여할 여력에 부정적인 영향을 미치고 있다고 이명박은 말하였다. 노무현은 한일 관계를 개선할 수 있는 수차례의 기회를 활용하지 못했다; 이명박은 같은 실수를 하지 않을 것이다. 이명박은 중국이 한반도 통일 이후에 대해 더 건설적인 사고를 할 수 있도록 한국이 미국과 협력해야만 한다고 말하였다. 버시바우 대사는 북한의 10월 9일 핵 실험 이후 중국이 북한을 대하는 태도가 변했다고 말했다. 또한, 그는 중국이 여전히 북한 정권을 유지하고 북한을 완충지로 유지하길 원하고 있지만, 그것도 변할 수 있다고 말하였다. 한미 양국이 함께 중국을 설득해 북한을 자산이 아닌 문제로 볼 수 있도록 하고 민주주의가 통일 한국에 득이 된다는 점도 설득해야 한다.

6. (기밀) 한국은 미국의 안보 지원에 계속 의지해야만 하지만, 한국은 한국군 현대화에 더 많이 투자해야 한다고 이명박은 말하였다. 한국인 대부분은 한국이 대외 군사 관계를 유지하는 임무에 형편없었다고 믿고 있다고 이명박은 설명하였다. 중국과 러시아는 한국에 대해 영토를 노린 바 있지만, 미국은 그런 계략이 없었다며 가장 믿을 만한 동맹국이라고 이명박은 말하였다. 버시바우 대사는 포괄적인 동북아시아 안보 협력과 민주주의 국가인 한미일 삼국 사이 잘 공조해서 중국이 더 책임 있게 행동하는 역내 국가가 되도록 설득할 수 있다고 덧붙였다. 이명박은 동의하면서 한미일 3자 관계는 북동아시아의 평화와 안정을 유지하는 열쇠라고 말하였다.

===== 북한 =====

7. (기밀) 이명박은 북한 원조에 제한을 둬야 하며 어떤 대북 정책을 목표로 삼던 북한이 국제 사회에 문호를 개방하도록 유도할 수 있는 정책이 되어야 한다. 대북 정책의 초점을 비핵화에만 맞출 게 아니라 북한을 개방하는 일에도 초점을 맞춰야만 한다. 대북 정책의 목표는 일본과 미국 기업의 대북 투자를 장려할 수 있는 여건을 북한 내부에 조성하는 데 있다. 버시바우 대사는 동의하면서 우리가 북한의 개혁을 유도할 인센티브 방식의 대북 원조를 설계해야만 한다고 언급하였다. 시장 경제 원칙이 북한에 유입된다면 북한의 개혁을 유도할 수 있다.

===== 대만 =====

8. (기밀) 이명박은 향후 미국의 대만 정책 방향에 대해 질문을 했다. 버시바우 대사는 미국은 하나의 중국 정책에 대한 다짐이 확고하며 중국과 대만의 통일은 오로지 평화적인 수단을 통해서 이루어져야 한다고 대답하였다. 이명박은 대만과 통일한 중국이 경제적·외교적으로 너무 강대해져서 동아시아의 힘의 균형을 깨지 않을까 우려된다고 말하였다.

===== 대통령 선거운동 =====

9. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 네거티브 선거전이 통제 밖으로 벗어났는지 물었다. 이명박은 한나라당 박근혜 후보의 전략은 2월 18일 설 이전에 지지율 격차를 좁히는 것으로 마지막 안간힘을 쏟고 있다고 말했다(이명박은 가장 최근 2월 13일 중앙일보 여론조사에서 49% 지지율을 얻었지만, 박근혜는 21%다). 이명박은 지지율 격차가 설 연휴 이전에 격차가 크게 좁아지지 않는다면 박근혜가 추격하기가 어려울 거라고 이명박은 말하였다. 이명박은 자신에 대한 박근혜 지지자들의 공격이 너무 지나치다며 역풍을 맞을 가능성이 높다고 덧붙였다. 이명박은 어떤 문건이나 정보가 나올지라도 걱정하지 않는다고 공언하였다.

10. (기밀) 이명박은 박근혜의 지지 기반은(약 15%) 그녀 부친 지지자로부터 자동으로 옮겨온 것이며 그녀를 지지하는 그 밖의 유권자는 5%밖에 안 된다고 말하였다. 지난 10년은 경제적으로 어려웠기 때문에 사람들은 일자리를 창출하고 노사 관계를 바로잡을 역량 있는 지도자를 원한다. 누가 대선 후보로 가장 적합한가를 물어보는 여론조사에서 박근혜는 항상 3위나 4위로 나온다. 이명박은 한나라당이 분당하지 않을 것을 확신한다며 자신이 한나라당을 떠나지 않을 것을 보장한다고 말하였다. 손학규는 (이 후보와 박 후보에 뒤이어 한 자릿수로 3위) 아마 한나라당을 탈당해 새로운 개혁 정당을 이끌 수도 있지만, 그럴 가능성이 크지 않고 경우가 어떻든 한나라당에 영향을 미치지 않을 거라고 이명박은 말하였다.

11. (기밀) 이명박은 진보 정당은 여러 정당으로 해체될 공산이 크며 그중 노무현의 핵심 지지자로 구성된 정당도 나올 거로 추정하였다. 버시바우 대사는 어떤 진보 후보가 되었든 자동으로 지지율 35%를 챙길 거라는 여론조사가 맞는지 물었고 이명박은 아마도 지지율 30%가 더 정확할 거라고 말하였다. 이명박은 올 대선은 정당 내부 갈등이나 지역주의에 대한 초점보다는 정책에 더 많은 초점이 맞춰질 수 있다는 말로 회동을 마무리 지었다. 그런 연유로 그가 외교 정책 문제에 관한 “MB 독트린”을 만들었고 그가 대통령이 되면 무엇을 할 것인지 구체적인 구상을 사람들에게 제시하려고 한반도 대운하와 같은 구체적인 사업을 제안한 것이다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/5/07seoul472|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07SEOUL472.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000472 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2016 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PINR [Intelligence], PREL [External Political Relations], ABLD [Buildings and Grounds], KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)] 
SUBJECT: LEE MYUNG-BAK: QUALIFIED, READY AND IN FIRST PLACE 
 
Classified By: Amb. Alexander Vershbow.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: Over a one-on-one lunch with the Ambassador 
on February 13, former Seoul Mayor and leading presidential 
contender Lee Myung-bak explained that voters in Korea wanted 
their next president to be, first and foremost, an effective 
leader, not focusing on regionalism, but on policies, 
especially the economy.  In addition to propelling Korea to 
renewed economic growth through various projects including 
his cross-country canal project, Lee said he would also 
improve the Korea's foreign policy.  Instead of creating 
policies toward the U.S. and Japan for local political 
reasons, Lee pledged he would "normalize" the U.S.-ROK 
relationship and improve the ROK-Japan relationship. 
Economic assistance for North Korea must have limits; high 
priority must be to encourage the North to open.  Lee said 
that the recent smear campaign against him by other 
candidates (read Park Geun-hye) would likely backfire, 
because he had already shown that all rumors about him were 
groundless in past election campaigns.  Lee confidently 
predicted that as the most qualified candidate, his 
popularity was not likely to falter anytime soon.  End Summary 
 
Source of Popularity? 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) On February 13 former Seoul Mayor and presidential 
frontrunner Lee Myung-bak told the Ambassador that his high 
popularity (Note: Lee leads all other candidates by 25 points 
or more in all polls.  End Note) was a result of a change in 
the Korean political atmosphere since 2002 when the demand 
for change propelled Roh Moo-hyun to the presidency.  Voters 
now want an experienced, qualified leader.  Lee said he polls 
first with even usual progressive stalwarts, voters in their 
20s and 30s, as the young are increasingly concerned with 
employment and the economy. Further indication of the change 
in Korea was the high ratings he receives in the Southwest 
Jeolla provinces where historically GNP candidates did not 
receive above five percent support  (Note: Lee receives up to 
36 percent support in Jeolla provinces in some polls.  End 
Note). 
 
¶3.  (C) Lee dismissed the thought that his support in the 
Jeolla Provinces would evaporate because, he claimed, this 
election the future of the economy would be more important 
than regionalism.  Lee added that as former President Kim 
Dae-jung's influence has faded, regionalism has become a less 
important factor in the Southwest.  Lee was confident he 
would continue to enjoy a high rate of support in the region 
because no progressive candidates had a vision for the future. 
 
Foreign Policy 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) The Ambassador, noting that Lee's main appeal clearly 
came from his stance on the economy, asked whether Lee's 
foreign policy also contributed to his popularity.  Lee 
responded that many believed President Roh Moo-hyun had 
failed to uphold ROK's international status and had been 
unsuccessful in managing the U.S.-ROK and Japan-ROK 
relationships.   Roh had failed because he had used foreign 
policy for internal political reasons.  Therefore, if he were 
elected, Lee would work to "normalize" relations with the 
U.S. and Japan.  On U.S.-ROK relations, Lee said there was a 
split between the old, who supported the alliance 
unconditionally, and the young who wanted to redesign and 
modernize the alliance.   The Ambassador explained that we 
had taken several steps to modernize the U.S.-ROK alliance in 
recent years, such as the agreement to transfer wartime 
operational control (OPCON), and to consolidate and move 
bases out of city centers.  Therefore, the relationship was 
becoming naturally more balanced, the Ambassador emphasized. 
 
¶5.  (C) On Japan, Lee said that Japan was preoccupied with 
domestic politics, negatively affecting its ability to 
participate constructively in the Six Party Talks.  Roh had 
failed several times to capitalize on opportunities to 
improve ROK-Japan relations; Lee would not make the same 
mistakes.  Lee said the ROK should cooperate with the U.S. to 
help the PRC to think more constructively about the 
post-unification Peninsula.  The Ambassador said that the PRC 
attitude toward the DPRK had changed since North Korea's 
October 9 nuclear test and that while the PRC still wanted to 
maintain the DPRK regime and maintain the North as a buffer, 
that could change.  The ROK and U.S. together had to 
encourage the PRC to see the DPRK as more of a problem than 
an asset, and to understand the benefits of a united, 
democratic Korea. 
 
¶6.  (C) The ROK should continue to rely on the U.S. for 
security assistance, but Lee stated the ROK should invest 
more to modernize its army.  Most Koreans believe the ROK has 
done a poor job maintaining the military relationship, Lee 
explained.  While China and Russia had territorial claims on 
Korea, the U.S. had no such designs and was the most reliable 
alliance partner, Lee said.  The Ambassador added that 
broader security cooperation in NE Asia and better 
coordination between the three democracies (U.S., Japan and 
Korea) could encourage China to act more responsibly in the 
region.  Lee agreed and said the trilateral relationship 
between the U.S., ROK and Japan was key to maintaining peace 
and stability in NE Asia. 
 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Lee said that aid to North Korea had to have limits 
and that the goal of any policy toward the North should be to 
steer the DPRK to open up its society to the international 
community.  The sole focus of North Korea policy should not 
be on denuclearization, but also on opening North Korea.  The 
goal was to create conditions in North Korea that would 
encourage Japanese and U.S. companies to invest there. 
Agreeing, the Ambassador noted that we should design 
assistance to North Korea in a way that created incentives 
for reform.  The infusion of market economy principles could 
induce North Korea to reform. 
 
Taiwan 
------ 
 
¶8.  (C) Lee asked what the future U.S. policy would be toward 
Taiwan.  The Ambassador replied that the U.S. was committed 
to a one-China policy, and that unification of the PRC and 
Taiwan should occur only through peaceful means.  Lee said 
that he was concerned that a China unified with Taiwan would 
be so powerful economically and diplomatically that it would 
upset the balance of power in East Asia. 
 
Presidential Campaign 
--------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) The Ambassador asked if the negative campaigning was 
getting out of control.  Lee said that fellow GNP candidate 
Park Geun-hye's strategy was to make a last-ditch effort to 
close the gap in ratings (Lee received 49 percent support to 
Park's 21 percent in the latest February 13 Joongang Ilbo 
poll) before the Lunar New Year on February 18.  Lee said 
that if the gap does not close significantly before the 
holidays, it would be difficult for Park to make up ground 
later.  He added that Park's supporters had gone too far in 
their attacks on him and the attacks were likely to backfire. 
 Lee declared that he was not concerned with any files or 
information that might come out. 
 
¶10.  (C) Lee said that Park's base of support (about 15 
percent) was automatically transferred from her father's 
supporters and there were only another five percent of the 
voters who support her.  Economically, the last 10 years have 
been difficult and people want a qualified leader who can 
create jobs and fix business-labor relations.  In polls that 
ask who is the most qualified candidate, Park always comes in 
third or fourth.  Lee said he was confident that the GNP 
would stay together and guaranteed he would not leave the 
party.  While Sohn Hak-kyu (polling third behind Lee and Park 
with single digit support) may leave the GNP to head a new 
reformist party, Lee said this was unlikely and, in any case, 
it would not affect the party. 
 
¶11.  (C) Lee speculated that the progressives would likely 
break up into several parties with one party consisting of 
core Roh supporters.  The Ambassador asked if a poll 
suggesting any progressive candidate would automatically get 
35 percent support was correct; Lee said that 30 percent was 
probably more accurate.  Lee concluded by saying that this 
year's election may focus be less on internal party conflict 
or regionalism and more on policies.  This was why he had 
produced the "MB Doctrine" on foreign policy and proposed 
specific projects like the cross-country canal to give people 
concrete ideas of what he would do as president. 
VERSHBOW
</file>