^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  07SEOUL1327  |  2007-05-07 01:22  |   기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>ECON EFIN ETRD KN KS PREL EINV PGOV }}  |
====== 제 목: 폴슨 재무장관 3월 서울방문 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 001327 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국가안전보장회의 커트 통((번역 주: NSC FOR KURT TONG))
국무부 경제성장, 에너지, 환경 담당, 경제·에너지·비지니스국, 동아태/한국과((번역 주: STATE FOR E, EEB, AND EAP/K ))
재무부 차관보 로워리, 부차관보 데스 도노, 오에시아/하세거 그리고 포지((번역 주: TREASURY FOR A/S LOWERY, DAS DOHNER OASIA/HAARSAGER AND POGGI ))
국무부는 미국 무역대표부 바티, 커틀러 그리고 오거롯에게 전달((번역 주:  DUSTR BHATIA CUTLER, AND AUGEROT))

행정명령 12958 비밀해제: 05/07/2017 
태 그: ECON(([Economic Conditions])), EFIN(([Financial and Monetary Affairs])), ETRD(([Foreign Trade])), KN(([Korea (North)])), KS(([Korea (South)])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), EINV(([Foreign Investments])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs]))
제 목: 폴슨 재무장관 3월 서울방문
분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사 근거 1.4 (b/d) 
번역자: PoirotKr (번역 주:트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/12/01 03:53//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점. 3월 6~7일 일정으로 방한한 폴슨 재무장관은 한미 FTA 제8차 협상 당일 저녁에 노무현 대통령과 권오규 경제부총리, 그리고 통상교섭본부장 김현종과 회동하였다. 폴슨 장관은 이번 논의에서 재확인한 내용은: (1) 신속무역협상권 마감일까지 한미 FTA 협상을 마감하기 위해 협상을 탈선 없이 그대로 진행하기 위한 고위급 차원의 지원; (2) 자동차와 금융 서비스 등 남아 있는 FTA 쟁점 상의 격차를 줄일 필요성; (3) 최근 시장 변동성에도 미국과 세계 경제의 기초는 탄탄; 그리고 (4) 북한 방코델타아시아에 대한 유엔안보리 결의안은 국제 금융제도의 안전성을 담보하는 법치에 대한 강력한 신호 등이다. 노무현 대통령은 돌이켜 보면 방코델타아시아 건이 6자회담 친척의 걸림돌이기보단 자극제임이 판명 났다고 믿는다고 했다. 요점 끝.

===== 노 대통령 =====
2. (기밀) 노 대통령은 미국 재무부가 1994년 멕시코와 1997년 한국의 금융위기에서 건설적인 역할을 한 점을 칭찬하면서 말문을 열었다. 폴슨 장관은 한국은 금융 위기 당시에 경제 개혁에 박차를 가했기에 여타 국가들의 모범이 되었고, 역경을 딛고 성공하는 방법을 제시했다고 응대하였다. 노 대통령은 동의하면서, 미국과 국제통화기금의 도움과 함께 한시적인 문제에 집중하기보단 종합적인 개혁을 단행한 당시 김대중 대통령의 지혜를 언급하였다.

3. (기밀) 노 대통령은 이어서 글로벌 증권시장이 최근 요동치는 문제를 언급하면서 중국의 정책 방향에 대해 우려하였다. 폴슨 장관은 미국 및 세계 경제의 기초가 튼튼함을 재차 확인하면서, [국방부망 배포] 견고한 성장, 낮은 물가인상률, 상당한 유동성 등 그가 일생 사업가로 체험한 최고의 시절 가운데 하나에 속한다고 지적하였다. 이러한 기초하에 폴슨 장관은 시장의 변동성에 대해 지나치게 걱정하지 않는다고 말했다. 재무장관은 다음 방문지인 중국으로 화제를 바꿔 중국이 경제개혁에 속도를 내야 한다며, 특히 중국 자본시장을 개방하고 개혁하는 등 한층 시장에 의해 결정되는 정책을 수용해서 “한국의 위치에 도달할 필요가 있다”고 덧붙였다. 대체로 중국은 개혁 속도에 박차를 가할 필요가 있다. 노 대통령은 동의하면서, 중국은 1997년 경제 위기 이후 한국의 경험에 관심을 가져야 할 필요가 있다고 말했다.

4. (기밀) 한미 FTA로 화제를 돌려 폴슨 장관은 한국은 다른 아세안 국가들은 이해 못 하는 양상으로 무역의 혜택을 분명히 이해한다고 말했다. 노 대통령은 FTA 협정을 타결 짓기 위해 최선을 다하고 있다고 말했다. 그는 한미 FTA로 미국에 가져올 충격은 한국 경제에 미칠 충격만큼 크지 않을 것이라고 설명했다. 결과적으로 한국민은 FTA의 득과 실에 대해 염려하고 있다. 노 대통령은 최종 협정이 공정하고 상호 이득으로 나타나도록 미국 측에서 유연성을 담보해달라고 요청하였다. 폴슨 장관은 장기적 관점 없는 쉬운 FTA는 없지만, 양국 대통령의 지지를 누리는 관계로 타결될 수 있을 걸로 "조심스럽게 낙관"한다고 응대하였다.

5. (기밀) 노 대통령은 돌이켜보면 자신이 한미 FTA 협상을 개시하지 않았다면 그의 정치적 입지가 더욱 공고해졌을 것으로 믿는다고 대답하였다. 소속 열린우리당과의 연대가 한미 FTA에 결정적인 주요 이유는 대체로 측정 가능한 무역 혜택을 양산하려면 지연시간이 있기 때문이다. 재무부 장관은 FTA를 지지하는 등 노 대통령의 강력한 리더쉽에 대해 감사했고, [국방부망 배포] FTA로 한국의 경제 부문 경쟁력을 강화하게 될 거라고 언급하였다.

6. (기밀) 노 대통령은 방코델타아시아 문제로 많은 힘든 일이 있었지만, 지금은 거의 마무리 되어 기쁘다고 했다. 노 대통령은 법학도로서 법 규범을 존중할 필요를 인식하였고, 대통령으로서 법을 적용할 때 정치적인 고려를 할 필요가 있음을 역시 인식하였다. 재무장관은 조만간 방코델타아시아 문제가 해결될 것이며, 세계 자본시장의 무결성을 보호할 필요성과 해당 법률을 염두에 두고 적절한 방식으로 마무리될 것이라고 대답하였다.
===== 법치를 신봉하는 이들에게는 좋은 신호가 될 것 =====
7. (기밀) 노 대통령은 처음에는 방코델타아시아 문제가 6자 회담에 걸림돌이 될 것으로 생각했고, 그로 인한 충격으로 매우 낙담했었다고 밝혔다. 그러나 돌이켜보면 방코델타아시아 문제가 북한 핵 문제를 해결에 돌파구를 마련할 자극제로 판명 났다. 만일 방코델타아시아 사건이 불거지지 않았다면, 6자 회담이 2005년 9.19 공동성명 구현 방법을 놓고 여전히 승강이를 벌이고 있었을 거라고 노 대통령은 말했다. 북한은 방코델타아시아 문제 해결이 다급하다 못해 과감한 조치를 마다치 않았다―그리고 나선 협상 테이블로 돌아왔고 미국과 핵 문제 해결에 협력하였다.

8. (기밀) 북한에 대한 노 대통령의 전반적인 시각을 공유하면서 노 대통령은 북한이 선택의 여지 없이 개혁, 개방할 수 밖에는 없다고 강조했다. 북한의 고립성과 바깥세상에 대한 미흡한 정보로 말미암아 북한은 자주 오판을 한다. 남한은 이에 북한을 더욱 건설적인 방향으로 돌리기 위해 북한의 “안내자” 역할을 하기 위해 애쓰고 있다. 노 대통령은 한국 정부는 몇 가지 성공 사례가 있다며, 특히 개성공업지구에서 남한 사업가들이 북한 사람들이 자유 시장의 작동 방식을 이해하도록 돕고 있다고 지적하였다. 노 대통령은 북한 근로자가 시장경제에서 보통의 노동자와 같은 행동양식을 익힐 수 있도록 가까운 장래에 개성공단의 고용이 20배 정도는 확대될 수 있길 희망하였다. 노 대통령은 북한은 남한에 “죽느냐 사느냐”의 문제라고 강조하면서 마무리했다. 독일의 통일 경험을 귀감으로 삼아서 북한을 변화시켜 평화적이고 성공적인 통일을 구현하는 일은 절대적인 당위이다.
===== 권오규 부총리 =====
9. (기밀) 권오규 부총리는 (재정경제부 장관 겸임) 폴슨 장관과 함께한 30분간의 회동에서 한미 FTA를 즉각 화제로 삼았고 진행 중인 협상에서 좋은 결과가 나올 것을 전망하였다. 권오규는 미국과 한국 대통령 모두 FTA에 대해 강력한 지지 목소리를 내왔다고 강조하였다. 그는 3월 말께 마무리되리라 낙관하는 모습이었다. 한미 FTA를 관장하는 한국의 유관 기관 절차를 담당하는 수장으로서 여타 장관들에게 한층 유연성을 발휘하도록 종용하고 있지만, 한국 정부가 한국민에게 뭔가 "먹힐 만한" 결과를 보여 주기 위해서 미국도 이에 상당한 일을 해야 할 필요가 있다고 했다.

10. (기밀) 폴슨 장관은 성공적인 결과물이 나오려면 양측의 고된 작업이 요구된다며, 그 이유는 우리가 미 의회에서 난관에 봉착했기 때문이라고 응답했다. 특히 투자자국가분쟁 조항과 자동차 문제는 더 많은 작업이 필요하다. 로워리 차관보는 금융 서비스 논의가 건실한 진전을 이뤘고 곧 마무리될 것이라며, 특히 임시적인 자본 통제 세이프가드에 주목했다고 덧붙였다.

11. (기밀) 권 부총리는 한국의 방송부문이 전면적 외국인 투자 개방에 대해 저항하고 있음을 강조했다. 노 대통령은 방송매체보다 인쇄매체와의 관계에서 더 고충이 있기 때문에, 한국방송협회에 대해 시장 개방을 압박하기가 어렵다. 버시바우 대사와 폴슨 장관은 방송 부문을 개방하는 것이 방송 수행력과 경쟁력을 개선하는 데 필수적이니 권 부총리에게 긴 안목으로 보라고 촉구했다.

12. (기밀) 권 부총리는 비록 2006년 5.0% 성장률에서 2007년에 4.5%로 하락한다는 전망이 있지만, 국내 총생산은 “꽤 양호하다”고 설명하였다. 그는 2007년 하반기에는 국내 소비가 증가함에 따라 실적이 더 낳아질 것으로 예상했다. 그 점이 국민적 자신감을 고양할 것이다. 권 부총리는 미국의 주택 시장의 건전성과 최근에 미국 서브프라임 모기지 사태의 파장, 엔 차입 거래가 현 세계 경제 상황에 미칠 충격에 대해 물었다.

13. (기밀) 폴슨 장관은 최근 시장의 변동성에도 세계 경제의 기초가 튼튼하다고 단언했다. 미국 경제는 지속 가능한 성장세를 보이고 있으며, 주택 시장은 조정에 들어갔다. 엔 차입 문제에 대해서 폴슨 장관은 엔화 가치는 시장에 의해 결정되고 있으며, 일본 정부관료들이 지속 가능한 방식으로 일본 경제성장을 지속하는 게 중요함을 파악했다고 강조했다. 재무장관은 그가 엔 차입 거래에((번역 주: Yen carry trade, 일본의 금리가 낮을 때 각광받던 투자기법이다. 낮은 금리로 엔화를 빌려 상대적으로 수익률이 높은 나라의 화폐 자산을 매입하여 수익을 내는 것이다 07SEOUL1727 제 번역문을 읽어보세요)) 대해 언급한 바가 전혀 없다고 했다. 개괄적인 요약을 마친 후에, 폴슨 장관은 계속되는 중국과의 고위급 경제회담의 목적은 특히 중국의 자본시장에서 신속하고 깊이 있는 경제 개혁을 촉진하기 위함이라고 요약하였다.
===== 통상교섭본부장 김현종 =====
14. (기밀) 김 본부장은 부하인 수석협상대표한테 8차 FTA 협상일정이 마지막 일정으로 생각하라고 말했다는 설명으로 말문을 열었다. 김 본부장은 단기적인 경제 이득과 장기적 전략상의 이득 모두를 위해 협상이 완수되도록 다짐하는 모습이었다. 폴슨 장관은 한미 FTA가 양국 대통령의 우선 사항이라며, 폴슨은 김 본부장이 신속무역협상권 마감일까지 협상을 완료할 필요성을 이해해 달라고 촉구했다. 재무장관은 슈와브 무역대사와 무역대표부가 협상을 주도하지만, 만일 협상이 타결되면, 협상안이 의회에서 통과되기 위해서 행정부 전체가 노력할 것이라고 덧붙였다.

15. (기밀) 폴슨 장관은 그가 모든 FTA 쟁점의 추이를 파악하고 있지만, 특히 투자자국가 분쟁해결(ISD) 및 자본통제에 관심이 있다고 했다. 미국은 협상 과정에서 이들 조항이 한국에는 어려움을 야기하겠지만, 미국은 이전 FTA 협상에서 다른 국가들의 우려 사항을 극복해왔다며, 우리가 한국에서도 그렇게 할 수 있다고 믿는다. 김현종은 투자자국가 분쟁해결과 관련 한국의 희망 사항과 관련해 미국 내 일각에서 몇몇 오해가 있는데 염려된다고 말했다: 한국은 투자자국가 분쟁해결 조항을 약화하길 원하는 게 아니라 단지 동 조항에 대한 해명을 원하는 것이다.―특히 용도지역제와((번역 주: zoning, ‘용도지역제’가 정확한 용어이며 어이없게 ‘조닝법’이라고 하는 경우도 있다.)) 일반 조세법령이 간접 수용으로 여기지 않음을 분명히 하기 위함이다. 그러나 한국은 투자자국가 분쟁해결의 가치를 이해했으며, 특히 현재 2만 명의 한국 투자자가 있는 중국 등 한국의 미래 FTA에서 투자자국가분쟁해결 조항을 포함하길 원한다. 금융 세이프가드에 대해선 1997~98년 금융위기의 기억 때문에 금융 세이프가드가 중요하지만, 김현종은 양측이 “그 문제를 우회하는 방법”을 찾을 수 있다고 생각하였다.((번역 주: 제 번역인 [[itn|투자협정뉴스]]를 읽어보면 어떻게 해결됬는지 알 수있다.))

16. (기밀) 김현종은 최근의 북미 관계 개선 소식은 좋은 뉴스지만, 그 일로 인해 통상교섭본부장인 자신의 직무를 더 어렵게 만들었다며, 그 이유는 개성공단 상품을 한미 FTA에 포함하도록 미국을 설득하라는 강한 압력이 그에게 가해졌기 때문이다. 이 문제가 노무현 정부의 좌파 지지자에게는 중요한 문제이다. 전 세계 192개 현행 FTA 중에 75개 협정은 역외 가공 개념을 인정한다; 만일 미국과 한국이 한미 FTA 내에 이 개념을 단순히 인정하기로 합의할 수 있게 되면, 핵 문제, 인권, 노동권 등의 문제를 고려하여 개성공단 상품을 포함하는 구체적인 문제가 연례 검토 대상이 될 수 있는데, 이는 문제를 분명하게 정리하지 않은 채 혹은 미리 판단을 내린 꼴이 된다고 김 본부장은 덧 붙였다. 폴슨 장관은 6자 회담의 진행과정이 어떻게 돼가는지 부처 간 폭넓은 점검을 수반할 거라고 지적했다. 지금까지는 폴슨 장관과 재무부는 주로 방코델타아시아 문제 해결에 주로 집중했었다. 버시바우 대사는 개성공단 문제는 미국의 레이더 망에 올라 있긴 하지만, 미국이 FTA 본문 안에 (검토 매커니즘과 관련) 어떤 합의가 반영될지 두고 볼 일이라고 하였다.

17. (기밀) 김현종은 쇠고기로 화제를 돌렸다. 김현종은 심지어 매해 2백만 명의 한국인 미국 방문객이 미국산 쇠고기를 안전하게 섭취하고 있는 와중에 미국산 쇠고기 수입금지로 한국 쇠고기 값은 뛰고 소비는 감소하고 있다고 한탄하였다. 그렇긴 하지만, 쇠고기 문제가 자기 본위로 생명력을 발휘하고 있다. 김현종은 방금 민동석 차관과 얘기를 나눴다며, 민동석은 4월 말 국제수역사무국의 결정에 앞서 3월 말까지 한국이 미국산 쇠고기 시장을 재개방하라고 미국이 요구하고 있다고 말했다. 쇠고기 문제가 한미 FTA를 죽일 거라고 김현종은 설명했다; 민간단체는 정부가 시민들의 건강 문제보다 무역 정책을 우선시한다고 불평하게 될 것이며, 한미 FTA가 국회에 도착과 하는 동시에 사망할 것이다. 한국은 4월 국제수역사무국의 최종결정 이전에는 행동에 나설 수 없겠지만, 사무국의 결정이 촉매제가 될 것이다. 버시바우 대사는 만일 최종결정이 5월까지 나오지 못한다면 한국이 이미 배포되고 있는 국제수역사무국의 초안에 기초해 내부작업을 시작할 것을 제안했다. 김 본부장은 “문제가 해결되겠지만, 지금 시간이 우리 편이 아니다”고 덧붙였다.

18. (기밀) 회의가 마치면서, 김 본부장은 폴슨 내무장관에게 몇 분간 일대일 논의를 하자고 요청했다. (버시바우 대사를 필기자로 배석해서)김현종은 자동차가 협상 과정에서 커다란 도전이 되는 양상이라고 설명했다. 한국 정부는 한국이 경쟁력을 갖춘 수출산업의 추가적인 시장진출이 한미 FTA의 가장 큰 혜택이 될 거라고 국내 지지층에 말하고 있는데, 자동차가 그 중 핵심 부분이다. 그러나 미국은 고작 3년~5년 이후 자동차 관세 단계적 철폐, 15년이 걸리는 화물차 관세의 단계적 철폐만 제공하고 있다. 너무 오래 걸린다. 김현종은 모든 한국 지방정부에서 반대했지만, 미국 차에 공정하도록 한국 자동차 세제 개편을 주도해 왔다고 지적하였다. 자동차 표준과 관련해서 한국은 “우리 측이 그 점도 해야 함”을 이해한다고 말했다. 그러나 그러한 변화를 만들 정치적 지지를 양산하기 위해선 한국은 3년 안에 화물차와 타이어를 비롯한 모든 자동차 시장 진출을 받아낼 필요가 있다. 김현종은 한국은 미국의 자동차 무역 불균형의 주요한 원인 제공자가 아니라고 지적하였고, 모든 공산품 관세를 영으로 만들자는 부시 대통령의 대담한 세계무역기구 제안도 칭찬했다. 폴슨 장관은 자동차 문제가 한미 FTA의 성패를 좌우할 문제가 될 거라고 슈와브 무역 대사가 그에게 말했다고 했다. 그는 슈와브 대사가 문제를 해결하려고 열심히 노력하고 있음을 알고 있다. 폴슨 장관은 FTA 문제에 관한 김현종의 견해를 제공해 준 점에 대해 그에게 감사하였다.

19. (미분류) 이 전문은 재무부가 승인하였다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/6/07seoul1327|포와로 탐정의 번역]](c) 무단복제나 전재를 금비합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07SEOUL1327.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR KURT TONG 
STATE FOR E, EEB, AND EAP/K 
TREASURY FOR A/S LOWERY, DAS DOHNER, OASIA/HAARSAGER AND 
POGGI 
STATE PASS USTR FOR DUSTR BHATIA, CUTLER, AND AUGEROT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/07/2017 
TAGS: ECON [Economic Conditions], EFIN [Financial and Monetary Affairs], ETRD [Foreign Trade], KN [Korea (North)], KS [Korea (South)], PREL [External Political Relations], EINV [Foreign Investments], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs] 
SUBJECT: TREASURY SECRETARY PAULSON'S MARCH VISIT TO SEOUL 
 
Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW. REASONS 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY.  On the eve of the 8th KORUS-FTA round, 
Treasury Secretary Paulson visited Seoul March 6-7 to meet 
President Roh Moo-hyun, Deputy Prime Minister Kwon O-kyu, and 
Trade Minister Kim Hyun-chong.  His discussions reaffirmed: 
(1) high-level support on both sides for keeping the 
KORUS-FTA negotiations on track for conclusion by the TPA 
deadline; (2) the need to close the gap on remaining FTA 
issues such as autos and financial services; (3) the 
underlying strength of the U.S. and global economies despite 
recent market volatility; and (4) the resolution of the North 
Korean Banco Delta Asia (BDA) case as a strong signal of the 
rule of law in safeguarding the world financial system. 
President Roh commented that, with hindsight, he believed the 
BDA case had proven to be an impetus rather than an 
impediment to progress in the Six Party Talks.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------- 
PRESIDENT ROH 
------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) President Roh opened by praising the U.S. Treasury 
Department for its constructive role in the 1994 Mexico and 
1997 Korean financial crises.  Secretary Paulson replied that 
Korea had accelerated economic reform at that time, thereby 
serving as a model for other countries and showing how to 
achieve success out of adversity.  President Roh agreed, 
noting the wisdom of then-President Kim Dae-jung in 
undertaking comprehensive reforms -- with the help of the 
U.S. and the IMF -- rather than focusing on short-term 
issues. 
 
¶3.  (C) Roh then raised recent turbulence in world equity 
markets and his concerns about China's policy direction. 
Secretary Paulson reaffirmed the fundamental strength of the 
 
SIPDIS 
U.S. and global economies, noting it constituted one of the 
best periods he has witnessed in his business lifetime -- 
with solid growth, low inflation, and considerable liquidity. 
 Given this foundation, the Secretary said he was not overly 
concerned about market volatility.  Shifting to his next 
stop, the Secretary added China should speed up its economic 
reforms and "needs to get where Korea is," by embracing more 
market-determined policies and, particular, reforming and 
opening its capital markets.  In general, the Chinese need to 
continue and accelerate the pace of reform.  Roh agreed, 
saying the Chinese should heed the ROK's experience after the 
1997 crisis. 
 
¶4.  (C) Turning to the KORUS-FTA, Secretary Paulson said 
Korea clearly understood the benefits of trade in ways that 
many other Asian countries do not.  President Roh said he was 
doing his best to conclude the FTA.  He explained that the 
FTA will not have as big an impact on the U.S. as it will on 
the Korean economy.  As a result, the Korean public was 
anxious about the benefits and costs of the FTA.  He asked 
the Secretary for flexibility on the U.S. part to ensure that 
the final agreement was seen as fair and mutually beneficial. 
 Secretary Paulson responded that no FTA is easy without a 
long-term view, but he was "cautiously optimistic" that the 
FTA could be concluded since it enjoyed Presidential support 
on both sides. 
 
¶5. (C) President Roh replied that, with hindsight, he 
believed his political position would have been stronger if 
he had not launched the KORUS-FTA initiative.  His own party 
coalition was critical of the FTA, chiefly because of the 
time-lag in generating measurable trade benefits.  The 
Secretary thanked President Roh for his strong leadership in 
 
SIPDIS 
supporting the FTA, noting that it will bolster Korea's 
economic competitiveness. 
 
¶6.  (C) Raising the BDA case, President Roh observed it 
demanded a lot of hard work but he was pleased it was now 
almost concluded.  As a student of the law, Roh recognized 
the need to respect legal norms; but, as President, he also 
recognized the need to take political considerations into 
account in applying the law.  The Secretary replied that the 
resolution of the BDA case would occur shortly, and it would 
be done in an appropriate way, mindful of the law and the 
need to safeguard the integrity of the world capital markets. 
 It will be a good signal to those who believe in the rule of 
law. 
 
¶7.  (C) President Roh acknowledged that he had initially 
considered the BDA case to be an impediment to the Six-Party 
Talks and had been very frustrated about its impact.  But 
with hindsight, it seems that the BDA case proved to be an 
impetus to achieving a breakthrough in resolving the North 
Korean nuclear issue.  If BDA had not arisen, the six parties 
would still be haggling over how to implement the 2005 Joint 
Statement, the President said.  North Korea was so desperate 
to resolve BDA that it resorted to drastic measures -- but 
then came back to the table and worked with the United States 
to settle the nuclear issue. 
 
¶8.  (C) Sharing his broader perspective on North Korea, 
President Roh emphasized that the North has no option but to 
change and reform.  Because it is isolated and lacks 
information about the outside world, the DPRK makes frequent 
misjudgments.  South Korea, in turn, is striving to serve as 
"a guide" for North Korea in order to steer it into more 
constructive channels.  The President noted the ROKG has had 
some evidence for success, particularly at the Kaesong 
Industrial Complex (KIC), where South Korean businesses were 
helping North Koreans to understand how a free market 
operates.  President Roh hoped that KIC employment could be 
expanded twenty-fold in the near future to permit more North 
Korean workers to learn to behave like normal workers in a 
market economy.  President Roh closed by stressing North 
Korea was a "life or death" issue for South Korea.  It was 
absolutely necessary to transform North Korea and bring about 
its peaceful, successful reunification, drawing on the 
experience of German unification. 
 
-------------- 
DPM KWON O-KYU 
-------------- 
 
¶9. (C) In a 30-minute meeting with Secretary Paulson, Deputy 
Prime Minister (and Minister of Finance and Economy) Kwon 
O-kyu turned immediately to the KORUS-FTA and predicted good 
results would come out of the ongoing negotiation.  He 
stressed both the U.S. and Korean presidents have voiced 
strong support for the FTA, and he was therefore optimistic 
it could be wrapped up by the end of March.  As the chair of 
the Korean inter-agency process overseeing the FTA, he was 
pushing other ministries to be more flexible, but the U.S. 
needed to do the same so that the Korean government could 
show some "saleable" results to the Korean public. 
 
¶10. (C) Secretary Paulson responded that a successful outcome 
demanded hard work from both sides, since we also faced a 
tough situation with the U.S. Congress.  In particular, more 
work was needed on Investor-State Dispute (ISD) language and 
auto issues.  Assistant Secretary Lowery added that financial 
services discussions have made solid progress and should be 
wrapped up soon, with special attention paid to temporary 
capital control safeguards. 
 
¶11. (C) DPM Kwon highlighted the resistance of the Korean 
broadcasting sector to open up fully to foreign investment. 
Since the Roh government had more difficult relations with 
the print media than with the broadcast media, it was hard to 
pressure the Korean Broadcasting Commission to open the 
market.  Ambassador Vershbow and Secretary Paulson urged Kwon 
to take the long view, since opening up the broadcasting 
sector was essential to improving its performance and 
competitiveness. 
 
¶12. (C) DPM Kwon described Korean GDP performance as "pretty 
good," albeit dropping from 5.0 percent growth in 2006 to a 
projected 4.5 percent in 2007.  He predicted better 
performance in the second half of 2007 as domestic 
consumption grows, and this would boost public confidence. 
Kwon inquired into the strength of the U.S. housing market, 
implications flowing from recent U.S. sub-prime mortgage 
difficulties, and the impact of Yen carry trades on the 
global situation. 
 
¶13. (C) Secretary Paulson affirmed the global economy 
remained fundamentally strong despite recent market 
volatility.  The U.S. economy was displaying sustainable 
growth, and a correction in the housing market was underway. 
Turning to the Yen, the Secretary stressed its value was 
market determined, and Japanese authorities recognized the 
importance of keeping their economy growing on a sustained 
path.  He noted that he never commented on the carry trade. 
Completing a tour d'horizon, Secretary Paulson outlined the 
key aims of the ongoing Senior Economic Dialogue with China 
to foster faster and deeper economic reform particularly in 
its capital markets. 
 
----------------------------- 
TRADE MINISTER KIM HYUN-CHONG 
----------------------------- 
 
¶14. (C) Kim began by explaining he had told his FTA 
negotiating leads to consider the eighth FTA round to be the 
last round.  Kim was committed to getting the deal done - 
both for the near-term economic benefits and the longer-term 
strategic benefits.  Secretary Paulson remarked that the 
KORUS-FTA was a priority for both Presidents, and said he was 
encouraged that Kim understood that it needed to get done by 
the deadline.  He added that while the negotiations were 
being led by Ambassador Schwab and USTR, if the agreement 
were concluded, there would be an effort by the entire 
Administration to get the agreement through Congress. 
 
¶15. (C) Secretary Paulson explained that while he was 
following all the FTA issues, he was particularly interested 
in investor-state dispute settlement (ISD) and capital 
controls.  We knew these had caused difficulties for Korea in 
the negotiations, but we had managed to work around other 
countries' concerns in other previous agreements, and 
believed we could do so here.  Kim said he feared there had 
been some misunderstanding in some parts of the U.S. 
regarding Korea's wishes regarding ISD: Korea did not want to 
weaken the ISD provisions but simply to clarify them -- 
specifically, to clarify that zoning and general tax measures 
would not be deemed indirect expropriation.  But Korea 
understood the value of ISD (and wanted to have ISD in its 
future FTAs, especially with China, where there were 
currently 20,000 Korean investors).  As for financial 
safeguards, this was important to Korea because of the 
memories of the financial crisis of 1997-98, but Kim thought 
both sides could find "some way around that problem." 
 
¶16. (C) Kim mentioned that while the recent improvement in 
U.S.-DPRK relations was good news, it actually made his job 
as Trade Minister more difficult, since it had prompted the 
National Assembly to push him harder to persuade the United 
States to include Kaesong products in the FTA.  This was an 
important issue to the left-wing supporters of the Roh 
Government.  Of the 192 active free trade agreements around 
the world, 75 recognized the concept of outward processing; 
if the U.S. and Korea could simply agree to recognize this 
concept in the KORUS FTA, then the specific issue of 
including Kaesong products could be subject to an annual 
review, taking into account the nuclear issue, human rights, 
labor rights -- without spelling them out, or making a prior 
judgment, Kim added.  Secretary Paulson noted that would 
involve a broader inter-agency review of how things were 
going in the Six-Party Process.  Until now, he and Treasury 
had focused principally on resolving the Banco Delta Asia 
issue.  Ambasador Vershbow noted the Kaesong issue was on our 
radar screen, but it remained to be seen whether the U.S. 
could reflect any agreement (on a review mechanism) in the 
text of the FTA. 
 
¶17. (C) Kim then turned to beef.  He lamented that the ban on 
U.S. beef was driving Korean beef prices up and consumption 
down -- even while two million Korean visitors to the U.S. 
each year ate U.S. beef safely.  Nonetheless, the issue had 
taken on a life of its own.  Kim had just spoken with Deputy 
Agriculture Minister Min, who said the U.S. was now asking 
Korea to commit by the end of March to reopening the beef 
market, in advance of the OIE decision in late May.  This 
would kill the FTA, Kim explained; NGOs would complain that 
the government was putting trade policy in front of its 
citizens' health, and the FTA would be dead on arrival in the 
National Assembly.  Korea could not act before the final OIE 
determination in May -- that would have to be the catalyst. 
Ambassador Vershbow suggested Korea start its internal 
processes based on the draft OIE finding, which was already 
circulating, even if a final decision could not come until 
May; Kim said Korea needed to go through its internal 
processes first.  Kim added "the issue will be resolved, but 
the timing isn't on my side here." 
 
¶18. (C) As the meeting concluded, Kim asked if he could have 
a few minutes one-on-one discussion with Secretary Paulson 
(with Ambassador as notetaker).  Kim explained that autos 
were shaping up to be a big challenge in the negotiations. 
The ROKG had told its domestic constituencies that the 
biggest benefit of the KORUS FTA would be the additional 
market access for Korea's competitive industrial exports -- 
and autos was a critical component of that.  But the U.S. was 
only offering to phase out car tariffs in three to five 
years, and to take 15 years to phase out truck tariffs.  This 
was too long.  Kim noted that he had taken the initiative to 
make Korea's auto tax system fairer to U.S. cars -- an 
initiative all Korea's regional governments had opposed.  On 
auto standards, he said Korea understood "we have to do that 
too."  But to generate the necessary political support for 
these changes, Korea needed to receive all its market access 
in automotive within three years - including for trucks and 
tires.  Kim pointed out that Korea was not the main 
contributor to America's automotive trade imbalance, and 
commended President Bush for his bold WTO proposal to zero 
out all industrial tariffs.  Secretary Paulson said 
Ambassador Schwab had told him that autos would be the 
make-or-break issue for the KORUS FTA, and he knew she was 
working hard to try to resolve it.  He thanked Kim for 
presenting his views on the matter. 
 
¶19. (U)  This cable has been cleared by the Department of 
Treasury. 
VERSHBOW
</file>