====== 제 목: 송민순 외무장관, FTA와 6자 회담, 한미 동맹, 이라크 문제 언급 ======

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001052 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2017 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID EFIN KS KN IZ
SUBJECT: FM SONG ON FTA, 6PT, U.S.-ROK ALLIANCE, AND IRAQ 

REF: A. SEOUL 1016 

¶B. STATE 46243 

Classified By: Amb. Alexander Vershow. Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 

요약: 4월 10일 송민순 외교부 장관은 (미국) 대사에게 한국 정부와 미국 정부는 한미 FTA에 관련해 협상이 끝난 문제에 대해 다른 해석이 있을 수 있다는 인식을 피하기 위해 계속해 협조해야 한다고 말했다. 한국 내 상당수 사람들은 미국 의회가 노동과 환경 문제에 대해 추가적인 대책 마련을 밀어 부칠 수 있으며 FTA 재협상을 재개하도록 할 수 있다는 우려를 갖고 있다. 이는 정치적으로 가능하지 않은 것이다. 북한과 관련해 송 장관은 방코 델타 아시아 문제에 관해 북한이 일이 복잡하게 몰고 갈 생각이 없는 것 같다는 의견을 피력했다. 그래서 일단 기술적인 문제만 해결되면 6자 회담이 다시 제 궤도로 돌아갈 수 있다는 것이다. 한국 정부는 미국에서 가능한 양국 정상 회담 일정으로 6월 말을 임시로 제시했다. 그러나 적절한 시기가 될 때까지 공개적으로 이 문제를 논의하기를 꺼려했다. 송 장관은 주한미군 기지 반환과 관련한 환경 문제에 대한 (미국 정부의) 상징적 제스처가 한국 국민들의 인식 문제를 해결할 수 있을 것이라고 제안했다. (미국) 대사는 이라크 수상인 말리키의 서울 방한 기간 동안 한국 정부에 힘을 실어줄 수 있는 Ref B points 전달했다. 말리키 방한은 이라크와 국제 협약을 지지하기 위한 것으로 아마도 한국 정부의 지원을 촉진하는 방식으로 이뤄질 가능성이 높다; 송 장관은 이 문제에 대해 연구해보겠다고 했다.


¶1. (C) SUMMARY: On April 10, Foreign Minister Song Min-soon 
told the Ambassador that the ROKG and USG should stay 
coordinated on the KORUS FTA to avoid any perception that 
different interpretations existed on what was negotiated. 
Some in the ROK were concerned that the U.S. Congress might 
push for additional measures on labor and the environment and 
reopen FTA negotiations, something that was not politically 
feasible. On North Korea, Song opined that the DPRK had not 
intended to get so entangled in the BDA issue, so once 
technical issues were addressed, the Six-Party Talks could 
get back on track. The ROKG had "penciled in" the end of 
June for a possible presidential summit in the United States, 
but was reluctant to publicly discuss it until the 
appropriate time. Song also suggested that "symbolic 
gestures" on environmental issues in connection to USFK base 
returns could address ROK public perceptions. The Ambassador 
delivered Ref B points encouraging the ROKG during Iraqi 
Prime Minister Maliki's upcoming Seoul visit to support the 
International Compact with Iraq, perhaps by accelerating 
disbursement of ROKG assistance; Song undertook to study the 
matter. END SUMMARY. 


한미 FTA
4월 10일 대사와 회동에서 송민순 장관은 미국 정부와 한국 정부가 FTA 타결과 관련해 협력을 유지하는 게 중요하다고 말했다. 4월 3일 한국의 한덕수 총리가 대사에게 전한 언급(ref a)과 관련해 송 장관은 개성공단과 같은 ‘역외 가공 지대’ 에 대한 잠재적으로 상이한 견해의 차이가 FTA의 순조로운 비준을 저해할 수도 있다고 말했다. 개성공단은 한반도 안정의 바로미터로 인식될 수 있다. 그리고 만약 6자 회담이 잘 진행되고 FTA가 비준되면 개성공단을 논의하기 위한 발 빠른 위원회의 회동이 긍정적 신호가 될 수 있다. 두 번째로, 송장관은 한미 FTA 협상이 영어로 진행됐다고 언급하며 그러나 한국어와 영어 판이 진본이기 때문에 문제를 복잡하게 만드는 일을 피하면서 협상의 문서화를 완료하는 게 긴요하다고 밝혔다. 마지막으로 송 장관은 민주당 주도의 미국 의회가 결국 좀 더 강력한 노동과 환경 관련 조항의 삽입을 요구하며 FTA 협상의 재개를 모색할 수 있다는 한국 일부 국회 의원들의 의 우려를 표명했다. 송 장관은 한국 정부는 경청할 준비가 돼 있으며 협상이 타결된 뒤 새롭게 노동과 환경과 관련한 조항의 삽입을 주장하는 미국 정부의 노력은 “재앙 같은” 사태가 될 수도 있다고 말했다. 
--------- 
KORUS FTA 
---------
¶2. (C) During an April 10 meeting with the Ambassador, 
Foreign Minister Song Min-soon said that it was important for 
the USG and ROKG to stay on message and remain coordinated on 
interpretations of what was signed by the FTA negotiators. 
Echoing statements ROK Prime Minister Han Duck-soo made to 
the Ambassador on April 3 (ref a), FM Song said that 
potential differences of opinion on "Outward Processing 
Zones," like the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC), could 
hinder a smooth ratification of the FTA. KIC might come to 
be perceived as a barometer of security on the Peninsula, and 
if Six-Party Talks went well, and once the FTA was ratified, 
a swift convening of the committee to discuss the KIC would 
be a positive sign. Second, Song noted that the KORUS FTA 
negotiations were conducted in English, but since both Korean 
and English versions would be authentic, it would be 
essential to complete the agreement's documentation without 
complications. 
Finally, Song expressed the concern of some 
ROK National Assemblymen that a Democratic U.S. Congress 
might seek to, essentially, reopen FTA negotiations to demand 
tougher labor and environmental provisions. Song said that 
the ROKG was willing to listen, but USG efforts to insist on 
new labor and environmental provisions, after the 
negotiations were concluded, would be "disastrous." 

대사는 FTA의 성공적인 결론 도출에 대해 한국 정부에 거듭 축하를 전했다. 대사는 한덕수 총리에게 말한 것처럼 개성공단과 관련해 타결된 해법을 표현하는데 있어 차이가 있을 지라도 미국 정부는 역외 가공 지대에 대한 언질을 지킬 것이라고 말했다. 한미 양측은 FTA가 이미 개성공단에서 생산된 물품들을 포함하고 있다고 대중들을 오도하는 일을 피하도록 노력해야 한다. 6자 회담이 일단 좀 더 진전을 보면 FTA 비준 이후 적절한 시기에 개성공단 문제에 집중하는 것이 좀 더 현실적일 수 있다. 바라건대 그 시기쯤에는 개성공단의 노동 조건과 관련해 남아 있는 모호한 문제들이 명확해질 수 있다. 노동과 환경 문제는 이 시점 미국 의회에는 민감한 주제이다. 그러나 이 문제는 다른 FTA 파트너 국가들에서 노동 조건과 관련해서보다 한국의 노동 기준에 대해서는 덜 문제가 된다. 그는 한국이 열린 마음을 갖기를 촉구했다. 



¶3. (C) The Ambassador reiterated congratulations to the ROKG 
for the successful conclusion of the FTA. As he had told PM 
Han, although there might be differences in presenting the 
agreed solution on the KIC, the USG stood by its commitment 
on "Outward Processing Zones." Both sides should strive to 
avoid misleading their publics that the FTA had already 
included goods from the KIC. Once Six-Party Talks saw more 
progress and after the appropriate period following FTA 
ratification, it might be more realistic to focus on the KIC. 
Hopefully by that time, ambiguities that remained about 
labor conditions in the KIC would be cleared up. Labor and 
environmental issues were a delicate subject with the U.S. 
Congress at this time, but the issue was less about ROK labor 
standards than about conditions in other FTA partner 
countries. He urged the ROK to keep an open mind. 

6자 회담
송 장관은 북한을 다루기 힘들고, 북한이 겨우 스스로를 관리하는 수준이라고 한탄하며 좌절감을 표현했다. 송 장관은 방코 델타 아시아와 관련해 북한이 문제를 교착시킬 의도도, 은행의 기술적인 문제와 관련해 얽히길 바라지도 않고 있다고 주장했다. 6자 회담에서 진전을 이끌어내기 위해 모든 당사자들이 해결책을 찾을 필요가있다. 송 장관은 만일 북한이 합리적이라면 북한은 방코 델타 아시아를 해결할 방도를 찾을 것이고, 2월 13일의 초기 실행 합의를 충족시키기 위해 진전을 이뤄낼 길을 찾아낼 것이라고 말했다. 불행하게도, 북한은 합리적으로 행동하고 있지 않다. 6자 외무 장관 회담의 개최 가능성을 묻는 질문에 송 장관은 장관 회담을 논의하는 것은 신중하지 않으며 지금 초점은 방코 델타 아시아가 돼야 한다고 말했다. 
--------------- 
SIX-PARTY TALKS 
--------------- 

¶4. (C) Song expressed frustration, lamenting that the DPRK 
was hard to handle and could barely manage itself. Song 
insisted that the DPRK had not intended to stall on the BDA 
issue nor had expected to get so entangled in the banking 
technicalities. All sides needed to find a solution to 
regain progress in the Six-Party Talks (6PT). Song said that 
if the DPRK were reasonable, it would find a way to resolve 
BDA and make progress toward implementing the February 13 
"Initial Actions" agreement. Unfortunately, the DPRK was not 
being reasonable. Asked about a possible 6PT Foreign 
Ministerial, Song said it was not prudent to discuss a 
ministerial; the focus now should be on BDA. 

미국-한국 동맹
송 장관은 한국 정부는 한국 대통령의 미국 방문 시기로 6월 말을 임시적으로 제시했다. 그러나 한국 정부의 현재 관심사는 FTA 반대자들의 우려를 불식시키는 등 국내 문제에 모아져 있다고 말했다. 대사는 6월 말 미국 방문은 한미 FTA의 90일 리뷰 기간의 말미라는 시기적 이점이 있다고 말했다. 또 6자 회담은 탄력을 회복해야 하며 회담은 비핵화의 2단계에 초점이 맞춰져야 한다고 말했다. 또 중대한 정치 이슈가 되는 걸 피하기 위해 한국의 12월 선거에 충분히 앞서 방문이 이뤄져야 한다고 말했다. 그리고 워싱턴에서는 한국 대통령의 미국 방문 시기와 관련한 어떤 결정도 지금까지 내려지지 않았다. 
----------------- 
U.S.-ROK ALLIANCE 
----------------- 

¶5. (C) Song said that the ROKG had "penciled in" the end of 
June for a ROK Presidential visit to the United States, but 
did not want to publicly discuss it because the ROKG's 
current focus was on domestic issues, such as addressing 
concerns of FTA opponents. The Ambassador noted that the 
advantage of a late-June visit could be that it would come at 
the end of the 90-day review period for the KORUS FTA, the 
6PT should have regained momentum and talks would be focused 
on Phase II of denuclearization, and it was enough ahead of 
the ROK December general election to avoid significant 
politicization. That said, there had been no decision yet in 
Washington. 
송 장관은 ‘특수 대책 합의’(SMA) 투명성과 책임소재 문제는 한국 정부에 문제를 야기할 수 있다고 언급했다. 특히SMA 자금이 군 기지 건설에 사용된다면 그렇다고 말했다. 주한 미군기지 반환과 관련해 한국정부는 한국의 환경론자들 모두를 만족시킬 수 없을 지라도 목표는 이 문제에 대해 좀 더 노력이 이뤄질 필요가 있다는 국민들의 일반적인 평가 문제를 해결하기 위한 것이어야 한다. 송 장관은 주한미군이 상징적 제스처를 취하기만 해도 환영 받을 것이라고 제안했다. 대사는 SOFA 수준을 벗어나지 않는 의무이행사항이라면, 겉으로 드러나는 상황을 조절할 수 있다고 말했다. 2월 국방장관 회담에서 합의된 패키지 협상은 존중돼야 한다. 


¶6. (C) Song mentioned that Special Measures Agreement (SMA) 
transparency and accountability issues could cause a problem 
for the ROKG, especially if SMA money was used for base 
construction. On USFK base returns, although the ROKG could 
not satisfy all ROK environmentalists, its objective was to 
address the general public's assessment that more needed to 
be done. Song suggested that even USFK symbolic gestures 
would be welcomed. The Ambassador said that we could help 
manage appearances as long as there were no obligations that 
went beyond the SOFA commitments. The package deal agreed 
during the February Defense Minister's meeting should be 
honored. 


이라크 국제 협약
대사는 Ref B 포인츠와 재무 차관보 키밋의 서한을 전달했다. 이는 이집트에서 5월 3일 이뤄지는 장관급 모임에 한국 정부가 참여하는 것을 독려하는 내용이다. 5월 이집트 회동에서 이라크 국제 협약이 공식적으로 이라크와 국제사회에 의해 서명될 예정이다. 이라크 말리키 수상의 오는 서울 방한 기간 동안 미국 정부는 한국 정부가 이라크 협약에 대한 추가적인 지원을 제공하기로 결정하길 희망했다 이는 아마도 한국 정부의 마드리드 약속에 따라 미화 1억4900만 달러의 지원을 촉진하는 형태가 될 것이다. 한국 정부가 말리키 수상으로 하여금 사우디 아라비아와 아랍 에미레이트, 쿠웨이트에 손길을 내밀도록 하는 것도 도움이 된다. 뿐만 아니라 5월 3일 회동에서 주목 받을 추가적인 개혁 조치를 취하도록 하는데도 도움이 된다; 송 장관은 이 문제에 대해 좀 더 들여다 보겠다고 했다. 
------------------------------- 
INTERNATIONAL COMPACT WITH IRAQ 
-------------------------------
¶7. (C) The Ambassador delivered Ref B points and Treasury 
Deputy Secretary Kimmitt's letter that encouraged the ROKG to 
be represented at the Ministerial level at the May 3 meeting 
in Egypt, where the International Compact with Iraq (ICI) 
will formally be signed by Iraq and the international 
community. During the upcoming visit to Seoul by Iraqi Prime 
Minister Maliki, the USG hoped that the ROK would decide to 
provide additional support for the Compact, perhaps in the 
form of accelerated disbursements of USD 149 million of the 
ROKG's Madrid pledge. It would also be helpful for the ROKG 
to encourage PM Maliki to reach out to Saudi Arabia, UAE and 
Kuwait as well as to take additional reforms that could be 
highlighted at the May 3 meeting; Song undertook to look 
further into the issue. 
VERSHBOW