====== 제 목 : 대통합민주신당, 싸워보지도 않고 포기 ======

작성일 : 2008년 1월 17일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000096 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2014 
TAGS: KN KS PGOV PREL PINR
SUBJECT: UNDP GOING DOWN WITHOUT A FIGHT 

Classified By: Amb. Alexander Vershbow. Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 

많은 카메라와 기자들 앞에서 시작된 회동에서 새로 민주신당 대표로 선출된 손학규는 대사에게 북한이 핵무기 보유 전면 선언을 연기하는데 대한 자신의 평가를 전달했다. 또 (기자들이 떠난 뒤에) 4월 총선에서 민주신당에 대한 그의 전망을 내놓았다. 손은 북한이 연기한 데 대한 실망감을 공개적으로 또 사적으로 밝혔다. 그러나 우리가 기회를 놓치지 않는 것이 중요하다고 말했다. 그는 4월 총선에서 민주신당의 기회에 대해 상대적으로 비관적이었다. 손은 아마도 약 70석을 얻을 것 같다고 말했다.(현재 137석으로부터 줄어든)수도권에서는 의석을 얻을 것 같지 않다고 했다. 손은 다가오는 선거에서 민주신당을 차별화할 수 있는 특정한 정책적 비전을 명확히 할 수 없었다. 대신 “야당”신세는 이미 내려진 결론으로 여겼다.


¶1. (C) In a meeting that started off in front of a crowd of 
cameras and reporters, newly-selected United New Democratic 
Party (UNDP) chair Sohn Hak-kyu gave the Ambassador his 
assessment of North Korea's delay in providing a full 
declaration of its nuclear programs and (after the press 
left) his forecast for the UNDP in the April National 
Assembly elections. Sohn expressed his disappointment with 
North Korea's delay both publicly and privately, but said 
that it was important that we not lose momentum. He was 
relatively pessimistic about the UNDP's chances in April, 
saying that they would probably only win about 70 seats (down 
from their current 137), none of which were likely to be in 
the Seoul metropolitan area. Sohn was unable to articulate a 
specific policy vision that would distinguish the UNDP in the 
upcoming elections, instead treating its "opposition party" 
status as a foregone conclusion. End Summary. 
----------------------- 
North Korea on His Mind 
----------------------- 
그의 마음 속의 북한
민주신당 리더인 손학규는 기자들 앞에서 1월 14일 회동을 시작했다. 대사에게는 미국 한국 동맹을 강화시켜준 데 대해 감사를 표했다. 손은 북한이 핵프로그램을 전면적으로 천명하는 시한을 놓친 데 대해 유감스럽다고 말했다. 그러나 너무 성급해 할 필요는 없다고 자문했다. 손학규는 북한의 가장 최근 신년 사설은 남한에 대한 직접적인 공격을 언급하지 않고 있다고 지적했다. 또 사설은 핵프로그램에 대한 확약도 담고 있지 않다. 이는 북한이 강조하고 있는 바가 바뀌고 있다는 징후이다. (사설은 지난해와 확실한 대조를 이루고 있는데,핵무기가 많다는 간접적인 암시를 주고 있다) 손학규는 남한과 미국의 6자 회담에서 긴밀한 협력이 양국 관계를 증진시켰으며 북한 핵문제의 진전에 기여했다고 말했다. 그는 민주신당은 미국 한국 관계를 계속해 강조하기를 희망하고 있다며 전시작전권 이양 같은 이슈들은 양국이 계속해 협심 노력하면 자연스럽게 풀려나갈 것이라고 전망했다. 


¶2. (SBU) UNDP leader Sohn Hak-kyu began the January 14 
meeting in front of reporters by thanking the Ambassador for 
his contributions to strengthening the U.S.-ROK alliance. 
Sohn noted that it was regrettable that the DPRK missed the 
deadline for submitting a full declaration of its nuclear 
programs, but also counseled not to be too worried yet. Sohn 
pointed out that North Korea's most recent New Year's 
editorial made no direct attack against South Korea and no 
reaffirmation of the nuclear programs, a sign that the 
emphasis has shifted. (NOTE: Although the editorial, in 
stark contrast to last year, made no mention of the country's 
nuclear status, indirect allusions to its nuclear weapons 
abound. END NOTE.) Sohn said that close cooperation between 
South Korea and the U.S. in the Six-Party Talks had improved 
our relationship and contributed to progress on North Korean 
nuclear issues. The UNDP, he said, hoped to continue to 
emphasize U.S.-ROK relations and expected that issues like 
OPCON transfer would resolve themselves naturally as the two 
countries continued to work together. 

기자들이 방을 나간 뒤, 손학규는 북한과 활동에 대한 대사의 평가를 요청했다. 그는 북한이 새로운 남한 정부에 접근할 때까지는 시간이 좀 걸릴 것이라는 의견을 내놓았다. 기다려 보자는 식의 접근법을 선호했다. 손은 북한 정부에 대한 이명박의 접근법이 현실적이라고 생각한다고 말했다. 그러나 그는 이명박이 북한과 남한 사이 관계의 진전을 중단하지 않기를 원한다고 말했다. 
¶3. (SBU) After the reporters left the room, Sohn asked the 
Ambassador for his assessment of the state of play with North 
Korea. Sohn opined that it may take some time until North 
Korea approached the new ROK government, preferring to take a 
wait-and-see approach. Sohn said he thought Lee Myung-bak's 
approach to North Korea was realistic, but he also hoped Lee 
would not stop progress on relations between North and South 
Korea. 

--------------- 
Party Prospects 
--------------- 
당에 대한 전망


손학규는 부끄러운 기색 없이 민주신당은 “매우 어려운” 상황에 놓여 있다고 말했다. 몇몇 당 지도자들은 서울에서 한 개의 의석도 건지지 못할 것이라는 의견을 갖고 있다.—현재 민주신당은 100석 가운데 약 절반을 갖고 있다—그러나 진보파의 아성인 전라남북도에서 대부분의 의석을 차지하기를 희망했다. 궁긍적으로 손은 민주신당은 아마도 299석 가운데 70석만을 차지할 것이라고 말했다. 12월 대통령 선거 패배는 민주신당이 새롭고 좀 더 실용적인 접근을 필요로 한다는 것이다. 민주신당의 많은 사람들이 과거 좌파 이데올로기에서 변화할 필요가 있다고 생각했다. – 사회, 국제, 북한 문제 등에 좌파 이념에서 말이다—그러나 동시에 한나라당과 차별화를 위해 중도 좌파에 머물러야 한다. 손학규는 탈당자가 늘어날 가능성에 대해 걱정하지 않은 것처럼 보였다. 극단주의자들은 떠난다면 당에 도움이 될 것이라고 그는 말했다.

¶4. (SBU) Sohn said unabashedly that the UNDP was in a 
"seriously difficult" situation. Some party leaders were of 
the opinion that the UNDP might not win a single seat in the 
Seoul metropolitan area -- where it now holds nearly half of 
the 100 seats -- but hoped to get most of the seats in the 
liberal strongholds of North and South Jeolla Provinces. 
Ultimately, Sohn said, the UNDP may only win 70 seats in the 
299-seat National Assembly. The defeat in December indicated 
that the UNDP needed a new, more pragmatic approach, 
according to Sohn. Many people in the party thought the 
focus needed to change from the left-wing ideology of the 
past -- on social, international, and North Korea policy -- 
but, at the same time, the party had to stay center-left to 
distinguish itself from the Grand National Party. Sohn 
seemed unconcerned with the possibility of more party 
defectors, saying that it was better for the party if 
extremists left. 

손학규는 민주신당은 미국과 미국-북한 관계에 대한 정치적인 입장에서 상당한 변화를 경험했다고 말했다. 노무현의 잦은 반미 수사를 언급하는 듯 했다. 그는 대체적인 분위기는 당이 변해야 하며, 북한 한국 관계의 증진에 민주신당이 더욱 기여를 해야 한다는 걸 의미했다고 말했다. 손학규는 정치지도자들을 만나, 양국 관계를 증진시키기 위해 미국 방문을 희망했다. 그럼에도 불구하고, 당의 과거를 옹호하면서 노무현 정부와 당이 추구한 모든 정책들이 잘못된 것은 아니다고 말했다. –때때로 정책들이 효과적으로 소통되지 않았다는 것이다.
¶5. (SBU) Sohn said the UNDP had experienced quite a change 
in its political stance in regard to U.S. and U.S.-North 
Korea relations, likely referring to Roh Moo-hyun's frequent 
anti-U.S. rhetoric. The general climate, he said, was that 
the party had to change, and that meant the UNDP could 
contribute more to the advancement of the U.S.-ROK 
relationship. Sohn mentioned that he hoped to travel to the 
U.S. to meet with political leaders and to enhance relations 
between the two countries. Nevertheless, he defended the 
party's past and said that not every policy the Roh 
government and the party had pursued was wrong -- sometimes 
the policies were just not communicated effectively. 

과거 실수를 되풀이하는 위험에 처해있는 상황에서, 손학규는 한나라당 후보들에 맞서 당이 최근 공표된 부동산세 감면을 넘어서는 어떤 구체적인 정책이나 전략을 명확히 할 수 없었다. 사실상 그는 이명박이 제안한 많은 정책들에 대해 동의를 나타냈다. 만약 이명박의 정책이 일자리를 창출하고 삶의 더 윤택하게 한다면 손은 그를 지지할 것이다. 그러나 이명박의 정책이 국민들에게 이롭지 않다면(예를 들어 대운하 프로젝트 같은 당선자의 정책), 민주신당은 강고하게 반대한다. 어떻게 그 같은 일을 성취할 것이냐에 대해 자세히 말하지 않고서, 손학규는 민주신당은 가장 지지를 받는 야당이며 동시에 남한 정치사에서 가장 강고한 반대를 받는 정당이 될 수 있다고 말했다.
¶6. (SBU) In danger of repeating past mistakes, Sohn was 
unable to articulate any specific policy or strategy that the 
party would use to counter GNP candidates beyond a recently 
announced real estate tax cut. In fact, he said that he 
agreed with many of Lee Myung-bak's proposed policies. If 
Lee Myung-bak's policy helped create jobs and made people's 
lives better, then Sohn would support him, but if his 
policies were not beneficial to the people (e.g. the 
President-elect's grandiose canal project), then UNDP would 
be firmly opposed. Without elaborating on how it would 
accomplish such a task, Sohn said the UNDP would be both the 
most supportive opposition political party and also the party 
with the firmest opposition in South Korea's political 
history. 

----------- 
FTA Jitters 
----------- 

손학규는 한미 FTA에 대한 당의 반대는 변화해야 한다고 말했다. 사실상 한국 경제계의 모든 리더들이 그가 대사를 만나기 직전에 그의 사무실에서 회합을 FTA 비준을 호소했다. FTA를 지지하는 손은 FTA를 비난하는 몇몇 미국 지도자들에 대한 얘기를 전해들음으로써 한국 국민들이 한국이 먼저 FTA를 비준하는 걸 걱정하고 있다고 우려를 나타냈다. 손은 개인적으로는 자유시장을 믿으며, 한국이 FTA를 비준해야 한다고 생각한다고 말했다. (손은 1월 14일 기자들에게 국회가 만일 농부들을 보상할 수 있는 조절 지원안을 통과시킨다면 비준을 지지한다고 말했다. 그러나 2월 비준안 투표에 대한 지지여부에 대해서는 명확히 하지 않았다. )

¶7. (SBU) Sohn said that the party's opposition to the KORUS 
FTA should be changed. In fact, leaders of all the major 
Korean business associations had convened in his office just 
before he met with the Ambassador to appeal for the 
ratification of the FTA. Sohn, who supports the FTA, 
expressed some concern that hearing some U.S. leaders' 
comments criticizing the FTA made South Koreans worried about 
ratifying first. Sohn said that he personally believed in 
the free-market system and thinks Korea should ratify the 
FTA. (NOTE: Sohn told reporters on January 14 that he would 
support the FTA's ratification if the National Assembly 
passed adjustment assistance to compensate Korean farmers, 
but he has not been specific about his support for a 
ratification vote in February. END NOTE.) 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
코멘트
대통령 선거에서 진보파가 참패한 뒤 거의 한 달이 지난 시점에서, 손이 명확한 정책적 비전을 내놓을 없다는 점은 민주신당의 풀리지 않은 정체성 위기를 보여준다. 민주신당은 새로운 지도자들 뽑는데 더 중점을 뒀었다.—지도자를 뽑는 적절한 방식에 대한 광범위한 논의를 포함해—당의 정책을 새롭게 하는 것은 차순위였다. 그들의 대통령 후보를 뽑는 예비선거 기간 동안 그들을 이리저리 몰고 간 문제에 대한 방법에 똑같이 초점을 맞추는 모습을 보인 것이다. 교황선출과 같은 과정을 거쳐 진보파들은 최근 한나라당을 탈당했고, 대통령 예비후보 경선에서 떨어진 한 남자에게 그들의 믿음을 줬다. 이들은 경기도를 성공적으로 이끈 전 지사로서 손학규의 매력이 수도권에서 몇 석이라도 건져줄 것을 희망했다. 그러나 손학규는 난국에 빠진 민주신당을 지도할 비전을 결여한 것처럼 보인다. 이는 총선에서 패배와 함께 궁긍적으로는 손학규가 4월 이후에 당을 이끌지 못할 것이라는 점을 확인시켜 준다. 실제로 향후 수준 동안에 걸쳐 계속되는 탈당은 손학규와 민주신당을 4월 총선이 열리기 이전이라도 무관한 것으로 만들 수 있다. 


¶8. (C) Almost one month after the progressives' landslide 
defeat in the presidential elections, Sohn's inability to 
articulate a clear policy vision for the party underscores 
the UNDP's unresolved identity crisis. The party has been 
more focused on selecting a new leader -- including extensive 
debate about the proper mechanism for doing so -- than on 
revamping party policy, displaying the same focus on method 
over substance that dogged them during their Presidential 
primary. Through their Papal Court-like leader selection 
process, the progressives have put their faith in a man who 
only recently defected from the GNP and failed to win the 
UNDP's nomination as presidential candidate. They hope that 
Sohn's appeal as a successful former governor of the booming 
Gyeonggi province will help them salvage a few seats in the 
Seoul metropolitan area. However, Sohn seems to lack the 
vision to lead the UNDP out of its morass, and this, together 
with the party's likely routing in the National Assembly 
elections, virtually assures that Sohn will not likely 
continue to lead the party after April. Indeed, continuing 
defections from the party over the coming weeks may make Sohn 
and the UNDP irrelevant even before the April 9 elections are 
held. 
VERSHBOW 
