====== 제 목 : 국회, 개원했으나 일할 생각은 없어 ======

작성일 : 2008년 7월 16일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001427 

SIPDIS 

PASS USTR FOR CUTLER, TRICK AND YOO 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KN KS
SUBJECT: NATIONAL ASSEMBLY OPENS, BUT NOT FOR BUSINESS 

Classified By: A/POL Brian McFeeters. Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 

요약: 
18대 국회가 결국 7월 10일 개회했다. 5주간에 걸쳐 주요 야당의 보이콧을 종식시키면서 개회한 것이다. 정치 분석가들은 정치적 마비상태에 대한 대중들의 부정적 견해, 7월 17일 제헌절 60주년을 준비할 필요성, 경제 악화 등을 야당이 양보하고, 일하기로 동의한 이유로 언급했다. 국회는 곧 그 관심을 정부가 소고기 문제 처리에 대한 조사로 돌릴 것이다. 그리고 조사가 끝나는 8월 20일까지 상임위원회는 구성되지 않을 것이다. 상임위 형태와 구성, 위원장 선출 등에 대한 협상은 격렬할 것 같다. 정치인들은 그들의 늦은 국회 개원 후, 양보할 수 있다는 열의를 느끼고 있을 것이다. 그러나 민주당은 몇몇 핵심 상임위를 지배하기 위해 잘 싸울 것이다. 여당인 한나라당은 친박 국회의원들이 함께함에 따라 299석 가운데 182석(60%)을 가질 것이다. 이는 모든 상임위에서 다수를 확보하기에 충분한 숫자이다. 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The 18th National Assembly finally opened 
on July 10, ending the main opposition party's five week 
boycott. Pundits cited negative public opinion about the 
political paralysis, the need to prepare for the 60th 
anniversary of the Constitution on July 17, and the worsening 
economy as reasons the opposition conceded and agreed to 
begin work. The Assembly will soon turn its attention to an 
investigation into the government's handling of the beef 
issue, and until this investigation wraps up August 20, it is 
possible the committees will not form. Negotiations over the 
form, composition, and leadership of the standing committees 
are likely to be fierce. Politicians may be feeling the heat 
to concede after their late start, but the main opposition 
party, the Democratic Party, will probably put up a good 
fight to control a few key committees. The ruling Grand 
National Party (GNP) is likely to have 182 out of 299 (60 
percent) seats after pro-Park lawmakers join the party, 
enough to secure the majority in all standing committees. 
End Summary 

-------------------------- 
Assembly Open for Business 
-------------------------- 
국회 개원 업무 시작
7월 10일 개회식을 한 뒤에 국회는 매우 중요한 이슈들을 해결하는데 시간을 허비하지 않았다. 즉각적으로 만장 일치 결의안을 통과시켰는데, 일본이 논쟁이 일고 있는 리앙쿠르 암도(한국인들에게는 독도, 일본인들에게 타케시마)에 대한 영유권 주장을 포기하라고 촉구하는 내용이었다. 7월 14일 한나라당 홍준표 원내총무는 서울에서 남북한 국회회담에 대한 제안과 함께 민생 문제가 해결될 때까지 헌법 개정 논의를 연기하자고 제안했다. 그리고 “열심히 일하고 경제를 살리는 국회”로 돌아갈 것을 요청했다. 

¶2. (SBU) After the opening ceremony on July 10, the National 
Assembly wasted no time in addressing issues of great 
importance and immediately passed a resolution all agreed on, 
urging Japan to forego its claim of the controversial 
Liancourt Rocks ("Dokdo" to Koreans, and "Takeshima" to the 
Japanese). On July 14, Grand National Party (GNP) floor 
leader Hong Joon-pyo, from Seoul, announced suggestions for 
an inter-Korean parliamentary dialogue, postponement of 
discussion of a possible constitutional amendment until 
issues of public welfare were addressed, and called for a 
return to a "hard-working, economy-reviving National 
Assembly." 

국회는 부산 출신으로 5선 의원인 김형오를 의장으로 선출했다. 한나라당은 원래 민주당이 없는 상태에서 국회를 소집한 7월 4일 의장을 뽑으려고 계획했었다. 그러나 새롭게 선출된 박희태 한나라당 대표는 민주당이 합류할 때까지 투표를 연기하기로 결정했다. 물론 한나라당 단독 과반으로 김을 의장에 뽑을 수 있었다. 의장으로서 선택에 곧바로 뒤이어, 김형오는 2년 안에 헌법 개정을 요청한 데 대해 즉각적으로 한나라당 지도부로부터 비난을 받았다. 박희태 대표는 국회가 헌법 개정에 대한 논의를 시작하기 전에 경제와 이명박 정부가 안정화될 필요가 있다고 말했다. 헌법 개정은 많은 시간과 에너지를 필요로 할 것이다. 국회 정부 조사 특별위원회는 7월 14일 미국 소고기 수입 재개에 대한 정부의 결정에 대해 조사를 시작했다. 조사위는 8월 20일까지(위원들이 마지막 보고서에 대해 동의를 하지 않는다면, 조사 활동을 연장될 것이다)가동되는데 언제 어떻게 결정이 내려졌는지를 명확히 하는 것을 목표로 하고 있다. 이런 조사는 국회를 개원하기 위한 한나라당과 민주당의 타협안의 일부분이었다. 한미 FTA에 대한 토의는 소고기 조사라는 현안 때문에 연기될 것이다. 한편 민주당은 한미 FTA에 의해 영향을 받는 사람들을 위한 보상 대책이 있어야 한다고 주장하고 있다.

¶3. (SBU) The National Assembly elected GNP politician Kim 
Hyung-oh, a fifth term lawmaker from Busan, as Assembly 
Speaker. The GNP had originally planned to elect the speaker 
on July 4, when they convened the National Assembly without 
the Democratic Party (DP). Newly-elected GNP chief Park 
Hee-tae, however, made the decision to delay the vote until 
after the Democratic Party (DP) rejoined the assembly even 
though the GNP's majority could have placed Kim in office. 
Closely following his selection as speaker, Kim Hyung-oh 
received a quick rebuke from the GNP leadership for calling 
for a constitutional amendment within the next two years. 
GNP chairman Park Hee-tae said the economy and the Lee 
Administration both needed to be stabilized before the 
National Assembly can start discussing a constitutional 
revision, which would likely take much time and energy. 

¶4. (SBU) The National Assembly Special Committee for 
Governmental Investigations on July 14 began examining the 
government's decision to resume U.S. beef imports. The 
investigation, which will run until August 20 (unless the 
members can not agree on a final report, in which case its 
activity will be extended), is intended to clarify when and 
how the decision was made. This audit was part of the GNP-DP 
deal to start the National Assembly session. Discussions of 
the KORUS FTA will likely be delayed because of the pending 
beef investigation. Meanwhile, the DP is insisting on 
measures to compensate those possibly affected by the KORUS 
FTA. 

--------------------------- 
Party Accepts Park's People 
--------------------------- 
박근혜 사람들을 받아들이다 

7월 10일 한나라당은 무조건적으로 4월 선거에서 당선된 박근혜를 지지하는 의원들을 받아들이기로 결정했다. 박근혜에 충직한 모두 25명의 국회의원들이 친박근혜연대라는 당의 일원이나 무소속으로서 당선됐다. (13명은 친박연대, 12명은 무소속이다) 한나라당은 이들 정치인들이 4월 선거에서 당의 후보로 나서는 걸 거부했다. 이렇게 함으로써 박근혜 지지자들과 이명박 대톨령에 충직한 사람들 간에 당내 분열을 악화시켰다. 박근혜 파의 당 복귀는 이런 두 분파를 하나로 묶는데 중요한 조치이다. 또 한나라당을 국회에서 더 큰 다수로 만들었다. 만약 다른 다섯 명의 친여당 의원들이 합류한다면, 한나라당은 182석이 될 것이다. 이는 모든 상임위원회에서 다수를 보장하기에 충분한 숫자이다.
¶5. (SBU) On July 10, the GNP decided to unconditionally 
allow Park Geun-hye's supporters elected in April into the 
party. A total of 25 lawmakers loyal to Park were elected as 
part of a minor party called the Pro-Park Alliance (13 
National Assembly members) or as independents (12 members). 
The GNP had refused to allow these politicians to run as 
party candidates in April, further exacerbating a factional 
split in the party between Park's supporters and those loyal 
to President Lee Myung-bak. The return of the Park loyalists 
to the party is an important step in uniting these two 
factions and gives the GNP an even bigger majority. If five 
other pro-ruling party lawmakers are also accepted into the 
party, the GNP would have 182 seats, enough to secure the 
majority in all standing committees. 

-------------------- 
Committee Squabbling 
-------------------- 
상임위 다툼
국회 정상화의 다음 단계는 상임위원회를 조직하고 멤버를 구성하는 일이다. 국회는 첫 번째로 현행 상임위 숫자를 17개에서 16개나 15개로 줄여야 한다. 이는 금년 초 이명박 행정부가 정부 조직을 개혁했기 때문이다. 2개 주요 정당은 과학 기술 정보 통신 위원회를 없애는 데 동의했지만, 환경 노동 위원회를 다른 소위에 통합하자는 민주당의 요구는 갈등의 근원이 되고 있다. 한나라당과 민주당은 그리고 나서 상임위 이름에 동의해야만 한다.-- 3개 상임위의 이름 변화에 대해 의견의 차이가 있다. 

¶6. (SBU) The next phase of normalizing the National Assembly 
requires organizing and staffing the committees. First the 
assembly will have to reduce the number of standing 
committees from 17 to either 16 or 15 due to President Lee's 
government organizational reform earlier this year. Although 
the two major parties agreed to eliminate the Science, 
Technology, Information, and Communications Committee, the 
DP's request to assimilate the Environment and Labor 
Committee into other committees could be a source of 
conflict. The GNP and the DP will then have to agree on 
names -- there are disagreements over the proposed name 
changes of three committees. 

상임위 구성이 결정 뒤에야 각당들은 위원장과 각 상임위에 대한 의원 배분을 위한 협상을 시작할 것이다. 한국 시스템에서는 여당이 모든 상임위의 의장석을 차지 하지 않는다. 한나라당은 약 182석, 민주당은 81석을 갖고 있기 때문에 정치 분석가들은 한나라당이 11개, 민주당이 5~6개의 위원장을 차지할 것이라고 예상한다. 가장 경쟁이 치열한 위원장 자리는 법사위로, 모든 법안이 이 위원회를 통과해야만 한다. 민주당의 원해영 원내총무는 진보파가 지배했던 17대 국회에서 법사위를 한나라당에 양보했기 때문에 보수파가 지배하는 18대 국회에서는 반대로 한나라당이 양보를 해야 한다고 강조했다. 

¶7. (SBU) Only after the composition of the standing 
committees are decided will the parties start to negotiate 
the committee chairs and the proportion of representatives in 
each. In the Korean system, the ruling party does not assume 
the chairmanship of all committees. Since the GNP has about 
182 seats and the DP has 81, pundits expect that the GNP will 
chair about 11 and the DP will get five to six. The 
strongest competition over party chairs is over the 
Legislation and Justice Committee through which all bills 
must pass. DP Floor Leader Won Hae-young emphasized that 
since the progressive-dominated 17th National Assembly 
conceded the committee to the GNP, it is the GNP's turn to 
reciprocate in the conservative-dominated 18th assembly. 

통일, 민주, 통상위원회 위원장 자리도 험난한 협상이 예고된다. 이는 한미 FTA 의 비준을 관장한다. 현재 4선 의원인 한나라당 남경필 의원이 선두주자이다. 한편 한나라당의 박진 의원이 선택될 수도 있다. 게다가 정부의 방송 통신위원회를 어떤 상임위가 다룰 것이냐에 대한 만만치 않은 토론도 예상되고 있다. 이 위원회는 국가가 소유한 언론매체들의 수장 자리에 영향을 미칠 수 있기 때문에 중요하다. 

¶8. (SBU) Tough negotiations are also likely over 
chairmanship of the Unification, Diplomacy, and Trade 
Committee, which manages the ratification of the KORUS FTA. 
Currently, fourth term GNP lawmaker Nam Kyung-pil is the 
front-runner, while GNP's Park Jin remains a possible choice. 
In addition, tough discussions over which committee will 
manage the government's Broadcast and Communications 
Committee are anticipated, important because they can 
influence leadership of state-owned media?. 

------- 
Comment 
------- 
코멘트
국회에서 한 건의 법안도 통과되지 않고 3개월이 흘러갈 것 같다. 이는 분노를 야기하기 보다는 정부 교체의 과정으로 인식되고 있으며 국민들이 국회에 거는 기대가 낮다는 점을 보여준다. 이명박 정부가 소고기 난리법석과 리앙쿠르 암도에 대한 일본에서 도발, 금강산에서 관광객 피살을 다루는데 있어 헤매고 있는 상황에서, 지지부진한 국회는 이명박이 바라지 않는 바이다. 정부는 요동치는 첫 몇 달을 보내는 상황에서, 동맹 이슈들 혹은 한미 FTA에 대해 입법 활동을 취하기까지는 시간을 필요로 할 것이다. 

¶9. (C) Three months are likely to pass without a single bill 
being passed in the National Assembly. Rather than causing 
outrage, this is seen as just part of the process of changing 
governments and reflects people's low expectations for their 
legislators. With the Lee Myung-bak government reeling from 
the ongoing beef fiasco, striking out at Japan over Liancourt 
Rocks and staggering to deal with the murder of a tourist at 
Mt. Kumgang, a stalled National Assembly is the last thing 
Lee needs. The government, shell-shocked from its tumultuous 
first months, will likely take some time before it can take 
legislative action on alliance issues or the KORUS FTA. 
VERSHBOW