^ 문서번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 배포일 ^ 분 류 ^ 출 처 ^
| 08SEOUL575 | 2008-03-21 08:26 | 2011-08-30 01:44 | CONFIDENTIAL | 서울 대사관 |


====== 한승주 장관이 이명박 외교정책을 혹평 ======

<code>
VZCZCXYZ0072
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUL #0575/01 0810826
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 210826Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY SEOUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9036
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 4002
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 8597
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO PRIORITY 4156
RHMFISS/COMUSKOREA J5 SEOUL KOR PRIORITY
RUACAAA/COMUSKOREA INTEL SEOUL KOR PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMUSFK SEOUL KOR PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI PRIORITY
</code>

*C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000575 
 
*SIPDIS 
 
*SIPDIS 
 
*E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2017 
*TAGS: PREL PGOV KS KN
*SUBJECT: MINISTER HAN SEUNG-JOO SLAMS LMB'S FOREIGN POLICY 
 
*Classified By: DCM Bill Stanton. Reasons 1.4(b/d) 
 분류 : 공관차관 Bill Stanton / 근거 : 1.4(b,d)



1. © 요약 : 3월 19일 서울에서 열린 공관차관들 월간 만찬회동에서의 연설에서 전직 외교장관이자 주미대사를 지낸 한승주가 이명박 신정부의 외교정책 방향에 대해 놀랍도록 비판적인 평가를 내렸다. 비록 이명박 정부가 1달 정도 집권했을 뿐이지만 그가 보기에 좋지 않은 시작을 했으며 여러 국내외적인 도전을 받고 있다. 국내외적으로 비현실적으로 높은 기대치를 이명박은 충족시키지 못할 것이다. 이명박이 한나라당 내외로 정치적인 문제도 직면하고 있으며 다가오는 총선에서 한나라당은 잘해봐야 본전치기일 것이다. 요약 끝

===== 방향성 없는 실용주의 =====


2. © 전 외무 장관이자 주미대사인 한승주는 공관 차관들에게 이명박 은 지나치게 대외정책에서 실용주의를 강조하고 있다고 말했다. 만약 이념, 감정 혹은 정치에 기반하지 않는 대외정책을 말한다면 그것이 옳겠지만 우리가 보고 있는 것은 ‘가치를 거의 배제한 초-실용주의’이다. 그는 이명박이 최근에 외교부에서 90%의 시간을 에너지 안보에 대해 이야기한 것을 예로 들었다. 그러나 에너지는 전적으로 사적 영역의 문제이기 때문에 이 문제에 대한 이명박의 관심은 10%라 해도 과도하다고 말했다. 이명박은 북핵이나 다른 안보문제에 대해서는 언급이 없었다. 한 대사는 90년대 초 그가 외무장관이었을 때 정책과 대비하며 이명박의 정책이 다차원적이지 않고 지나치게 실용주의적이어서 전체 방향에 대한 감각이 없다고 말했다. 그리고 이것은 이명박의 취임사에서 특히 두드러진다고 밝혔다.

3. © 한 대사는 이명박의 실용주의가 한국을 끌고 가는 방향에 대해 우려를 표명했다. 그는 한국에게 가장 중요한 미국 일본 중국 러시아와 같은 국가의 대사를 임명하는 것에서 노정되는 현재의 문제를 예로 들었다. 이중에 러시아 대사만이 최근 최근에 지명되었었으며 유임될 것으로 보인다. 그러나 현재 주일대사는 외무장관을 역임했으며 주중대사는 통일부 장관을 역임했고 그 자리는 아직 채워지지 않았다. 새 주미 대사는 지명 움직임이 없다. 한 대사에 따르면 이 자리들이 공석으로 남아있는 것은 정치적이다. 한국 정부는 4월에 어떤 정치인들이 당선되는지 보고 낙선자들을 이 자리에 지명할 것으로 보인다.


===== 다가오는 도전 =====

4. © 한편 한 대사는 국외에 주요한 도전들이 다가오고 있다고 말했다. 예를 들면 러시아 일본 대만 몽골 미국과 같이 한국에 중요성을 가지는 주요국가 모두가 지도자의 변경을 앞두고 있다. 이러한 변화는 한국이 다뤄야 할 새로운 환경을 조성하고 있다. “우리에가 가장 중요한” 미국에서는 누가 당선될지 알 수 없고 그/녀의 대외정책이 어떨지 가늠할 수 없다. 경제적으로는 이명박의 당선이 가져오는 즉각적인 경제 이익에 대한 기대와는 달리 고유가와 유독 한국에서만 벌어지는 달러화 강세, 고물가와 같은 새로운 경제적 도전에 직면해 있다. 덧붙여 미국 서브프라임 위기로부터 파생된 금융위기는 ‘파급효과’가 아니라 ‘파도효과’를 주고 있으며 미래에는 아마도 ‘쓰나미’효과가 될 것이다. 한국은 이러한 모든 도전을 헤쳐나가야 하는데 이명박은 한국정부가 도와줄수는 있어도 주요행위자는 될수 없는 에너지 안보 문제에만 집중하고 있다. 


===== 북한문제 다루기 =====


5.(C) 한 대사는 의식적이든 무의식적이든 이명박이 피했던 북핵문제에 대해 좋은 뉴스는 이것이 주요 문제로 발전하지 않았다는 것이다. 나쁜 뉴스는 북한이 작은 합의를 기술적으로 했기 때문이거나 남한과 미국이 과정 상에서는 어떠한 합의도 최대한 피했기 때문에 북의 비핵화가 실제로는 시작되지 않았으며 게다가 중국 학자가 지적했듯이 중국은 올림픽 전이나 혹은 올해가 가기 전에는 북한에 어떠한 압력도 가하지 않을 것이다. 북한이 핵무기와 농축우라늄에 대한 비밀을 지켜내고 시리아와 핵협력을 하더라고 누구도 북한 비핵화를 이슈로 만들고 싶어하지 않는다. 한편 북한은 핵무기를 원하는 것을 얻지 못할때 위협으로 사용한다. 


===== 대미정책 =====

6. © 미국문제로 돌아와서 한 대사는 이명박이 미국과의 관계를 복원하고 강화할 필요가 있다고 강조한점을 지적했다. 이것은 노무현 정부 시절 미중간에 한국이 균형자 역할을 해야 한다고 말하며 PSI나 미사일 방어 체계에 참여하는 것을 꺼렸던 이유로 한국에 대해 미국의 신뢰가 떨어진 점에 대한 대응이다. 한국이 미사일 방어에서 어떠한 역할을 하지 불확실하지만 현 행정부는 PSI 문제는 참여할 것이냐 아니냐가 아니라 어느정도로 할 것인가의 문제로 바꿀것으로 보인다. 이전 정부와는 달리 이명박 정부는 북한 붕괴시의 작전계획 5029를 포함하여 가능한 북한 급변상황에 대해 논의하는 것에 적극적일 거이다. 동시에 대사는 북한에 대한 원조및 개입 정책은 덜 포용적이고 상호성과 조건을 따지겠지만 그렇게 크게 변하진 않을 것으로 생각했다. 


7. © 그는 특히 미국에서 29세기의 실용주의가 독일 이상주의에 대한 반응의 차원이었다고 말했다. 같은 방식으로 한국 대중을 설득하는 이명박의 실용주의는 노무현 전 대통령의 ‘이념적이고 감정에 치우친’ 정책에 대한 거부에서 나왔다고 본다. 그러나 노무현은 발언보다 행동은 덜 이념적이었다. 한승주는 만약 이명박의 실용주의가 단순히 자원이나 찾고 문제는 회피하고 정치를 하는 것이라면 불충분한 대외정책을 보완하지 못할 것이라고 말했다. 이명박의 국내에서의 밀월관계는 이미 끝났지만 국제적으로는 여전히 지속되고 있다고 말했다.


===== 정책조언 =====

8. © 북한문제를 어떻게 해야 하며 외무장관이라면 이명박에게 어떠한 조언을 하겠냐는 질문에 대해 한승주는 북핵과 북한 일반 문제에 대해 행동을 하기전에 미중일러와 솔직한 논의를 하는 것이 첫 단계라고 말했다. 북한을 다루는데 있어 대중적 발언 이외에 한일간, 한미간, 미국 매파와 비둘기파 간의 차이를 없애는데 노력한 시간이 최근 있어왔다. 남한은 북한 인권에 대해 좀더 목소리를 내야 하며 탈북자를 늘려야 하며 납북자와 국군포로들에 대한 적절항 행동을 취해야 한다. 더 크게는 한국은 문제를 무시할 것이 아니라 적극적으로 문제를 해결할 필요가 있다. 이 차원에서 한국정부의 가장 큰 과제는 티벳에서의 급격한 변화일 것이다. 이 문제가 중국에서 발생하면 한국정부는 어떻게 반응할 것인가?


===== 코멘트 =====

9. © 몇 가지 한승주의 비판은 적절히 감안하고 들어야 한다. 한승주는 이명박 행정부에서 총리와 같은 주요한 자리를 원했으나 이는 한승수(또다른 한)에게 갔다. 또한 그의 가장 유명한 후배인 현인택은 또다른 고려대 교수인 김병국으로 대체되기전 이명박의 국가안보수석으로 유명했다. 현인택은 대학으로 돌아갔다. 그러나 그 자신은 보수인 한 전 외무장관은 포인트를 가지고 있다. 이명박 정부의 정책은 대외정책이든 국내정책이든 내용과 핵심을 결여하고 있다. 미국산 쇠고기 문제를 푸는 것부터 노무현 행정부 시정 유임자를 대체 하는 것까지 모든 문제가 제대로 되지 않는 것에 대한 변명으로 가장 자주 언급되는 이유는 4월 총선이다. 4월 9일 이후에 이명박 행정부가 정말로 바빠진다고 해도 한승주가 이야기 한대로 이명박은 주요한 모멘텀과 의지를 허비했다. 

버시바우




====== 원문 ======

<code>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2017 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KS KN
SUBJECT: MINISTER HAN SEUNG-JOO SLAMS LMB'S FOREIGN POLICY 

Classified By: DCM Bill Stanton. Reasons 1.4(b/d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: In remarks delivered at the monthly dinner 
meeting of DCMs in Seoul on March 19, former Foreign Minister 
and Ambassador to the U.S. Han Seung-Joo presented a 
surprisingly negative assessment of the foreign policy 
direction of the new Lee Myung-bak Government. While 
acknowledging that LMB's Government had only been in power a 
month, he thought that it was off to a bad start, and was 
already facing a series of domestic and international 
challenges, including unrealistically high expectations both 
domestically and internationally that LMB would not be able 
to meet. LMB also faced political problems both inside and 
outside of the GNP and an upcoming National Assembly election 
in which the GNP would "at best break even." END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------------- 
PRAGMATISM WITH NO SENSE OF DIRECTION 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Former Foreign Minister and Ambassador to the U.S. Han 
Seung-joo told the DCMs that thus far LMB had stressed 
pragmatism in foreign policy and this was correct if by 
pragmatism you meant a foreign policy not based on ideology, 
emotions, or politics. What we were seeing, however, was a 
"super-pragmatic policy almost devoid of values." He cited as 
an example LMB's recent meeting at MOFAT where it was 
reported that 90 percent of the time was given over to a 
discussion of energy security. Even 10 percent of LMB's 
attention to this issue, however, would have been too much 
because energy was primarily in the hands of the private 
sector, Han said. Meanwhile, according to all accounts, LMB 
had made no mention of North Korean nuclear weapons or other 
security problems.  Contrasting LMB's approach to foreign 
policy with his own when he was Foreign Minister in the early 
90s, Ambassador Han argued that LMB's policy was not 
multidimensional and was so pragmatic that there was no 
overall sense of direction, and that this had been especially 
apparent in LMB's inauguration speech. 
 
¶3. (C) Ambassador Han expressed concern about where LMB's 
pragmatism would lead Korea. As an example, he cited the 
current difficulty in assigning Ambassadors to the most 
important countries for Korea: the U.S., Japan, China, and 
Russia. Of these, only the Ambassador to Russia had been 
recently appointed, so he was likely to stay in place. Now 
that the Korean Ambassador to Japan had been become Foreign 
Minister, however, and the Korean Ambassador to China had 
become Minister of Unification, those positions remained 
unfilled, and there had been no movement on naming a new 
Ambassador to the U.S. The main reason these positions 
remained empty, Ambassador Han said, was political. The ROKG 
was waiting to see which politicians would be elected in 
April, and if not elected, would need those jobs. 
 
---------------- 
CHALLENGES AHEAD 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Meanwhile, Ambassador Han continued, major challenges 
outside of Korea were taking place. For example, all the 
major countries of importance to Korea had undergone or were 
facing changes in leadership including in Russia, Japan, 
Taiwan, Mongolia, and the U.S. All these changes would 
produce a new environment in which Korea would have to 
operate. In the United States, "the country that matters most 
to us," we did not know who would be elected or what his or 
her foreign policy would be like.  Economically, contrary to 
the expectations of immediate economic benefits from the 
election of LMB, Korea was now facing new economic challenges 
including the high price of oil, the curiously high value of 
the U.S. dollar in Korea alone, and high prices for 
commodities. In addition, financial troubles stemming from 
the sub-prime crisis in the U.S. were not having a "ripple" 
effect, but a "wave" effect and possibly in the future might 
have a "tsunami" effect. Korea would have to deal with all of 
these challenges but LMB was focusing on energy security 
where the ROKG, while it might assist, would not be the major 
player. At the same time, the KORUS FTA was facing more and 
more difficulties and the prospects were not good for 
ratification before LMB's visit to Washington.  Negotiations 
with the EU on an FTA were continuing but it would be a long 
time before a successful outcome would have a major effect on 
the Korean economy. 
 
------------------------DEALING WITH NORTH KOREA 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (C) Ambassador Han said that the good news on the North 
Korean nuclear issue, which LMB had either "consciously or 
unconsciously avoided" at MOFAT, was that it had not 
developed into a major crisis. The bad news was that 
denuclearization of North Korea had not really begun, either 
because Pyongyang was skillfully doling out small concessions 
or because South Korea and the U.S. eagerly construed any 
concessions as progress. Moreover, as a China scholar had 
told Han, China would not put any pressure on North Korea 
before the Olympics or even before the end of this year. It 
appeared that no one wanted to make an issue of North Korea's 
denuclearization even if the price was that North Korea kept 
its weapons and its secrets about uranium enrichment and 
nuclear cooperation with Syria. Meanwhile, North Korea 
continued to use its nuclear weapons as a threat if it did 
not get what it wanted. 
 
---------------------- 
POLICY TOWARD THE U.S. 
---------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Turning to the U.S., Ambassador Han noted that LMB had 
stressed the need to "restore" and more recently to 
"strengthen" relations with the United States. This was a 
reaction to the erosion of U.S. confidence in South Korea 
during the administration of Roh Moo-hyun, who had tired to 
balance Korea between China and the United States and was 
very therefore very reluctant to move ahead on programs such 
as PSI and Missile Defense. While it was still unclear what 
Korea would do on Missile Defense, the current administration 
appeared to be trying to find a way out of the PSI problem by 
redefining it as an issue of "more or less" rather than 
"either/or," offering greater PSI participation. Unlike the 
previous government, it also appeared the LMB administration 
would be more forthcoming in discussing possible 
contingencies for dealing with North Korea, including OPLAN 
5029 in the event of the North's collapse. At the same time, 
Ambassador Han said, he did not think South Korea's policy on 
aid and engagement with North Korea would change all that 
much, although there would be less "embracing" and more 
reciprocity and conditionality. 
 
¶7. (C) Ambassador Han noted that late-19th-century 
pragmatism, especially in the U.S., was to some extent a 
reaction to German idealism. In a similar way, Ambassador Han 
thought LMB's pragmatism, which had resonated with the Korean 
public, had resulted from a rejection of President Roh's 
"ideologically and sentiment-dominated" policies.  But Roh 
had spoken more ideologically than he had acted.  Ambassador 
Han concluded that if LMB's pragmatism simply meant finding 
resources, avoiding trouble, and playing politics, it would 
not compensate for an inadequate foreign policy. LMB's 
domestic honeymoon was already over, Amb. Han added, but it 
was still continuing internationally. 
 
------------- 
POLICY ADVICE 
------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Asked what he thought the ROK's policy toward North 
Korea should be and what advice he would give LMB if he were 
Foreign Minister, Ambassador Han said the first step should 
be a very frank discussion with the U.S., China, Japan and 
Russia before "jumping into action" on the best way to deal 
with the North Korean nuclear problem and North Korea in 
general. In recent years there had been more time spent on 
trying to iron out differences between South Korea and Japan 
and South Korea and the U.S., and between hard- and 
soft-liners in the U.S, than in dealing with North Korea in 
any way other than public pronouncements. South Korea should 
also be more outspoken about human rights in North Korea and 
increase the number of North Korean refugees it takes, and 
take appropriate action on Korean abductees and soldiers 
still being held in the North. In a broader sense, ROKG 
policy on human rights needed to be more measured and 
balanced, and the ROK needed to be more willing to address 
problems rather than ignore them. The biggest challenge for 
the ROKG in this regard might be if something even more 
drastic or tragic occurred in Tibet -- how would the ROKG 
react if the issue were China? 
 
------- 
COMMENT------- 
 
¶9. (C) Some of Han's criticism should be taken with a grain 
of salt. Han had hoped for a major position in the LMB 
administration, perhaps even Prime Minister, which went to 
another Han, Han Seung-soo. Also, Han's most prominent 
protege, Hyun In-taek, was the odds-on favorite to be Lee's 
national security advisor, which ended up going to Kim 
Byung-kook, another Korea University professor; Hyun went 
back to academia. Still, former Foreign Minister Han, a 
conservative himself, has a point. So far, Lee Myung-bak's 
policies, whether foreign or domestic, have lacked substance 
and coherence. The most often cited reason is the April 9 
National Assembly elections which are trotted out to defend 
inaction for everything, from resolving our beef issue to 
replacing the Roh administration's holdover personnel. Even 
if the Lee administration does get truly busy after April 9, 
President Lee has already squandered considerable momentum 
and good will, as Han Seung-joo argues. 
VERSHBOW
</code>