^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL1039  |  2008-05-21 05:31  |  기밀  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>KS KN PGOV PREL }}  |
====== 제 목: 보수적 학자들 서먹한 남북 관계에 대해 걱정 ======
  * 기 밀 SEOUL 001039 
  * 국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
  * 동아시아태평양/동남아시아 애론 코프((EAP/MLS FOR AARON COPE ))
  * 행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 남북 통일 이후((AFTER KOREAN REUNIFICATION ))
  * 태그: KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL(([External Political Relations]))
  * 제 목: 보수적 학자들 서먹한 남북 관계에 대해 걱정
  * 분류자: 정치 공사 참사관 조셉 윤((POL M/C Joseph Yun.)).  근거 1.4(b/d) 
  * 번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2013/03/16 12:15//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점: 보수 학자들은 노무현 대통령의 대북정책이 너무 수용적이라고 비판한다. 지금은 북미 관계가 개선되는 가운데, 이명박 대통령이 북한과 대화를 하지 않는 게 한국의 영향력을 상실을 의미할까 걱정이다. 요점 끝.

2. (기밀) 5월 13일과 15일 우리는 경남대 북한대학원 류길재 교수, 허문영 통일연구원 북한연구센터 소장, 그리고 박형중 통일연구원 선임연구원 등과 함께 회동하였다. 지난해 우리와 함께한 회동에서, 이들 전문가는 당시 노무현의 //“평화와 번영”// 정책은 너무 수용적이며, 북한을 변화시키기에는 효과적이지 않다고 평가한 바 있다. 그래서, 우리는 이들 전문가에게 그 모습이 드러낸 이명박 대통령의 대북정책에 대한 논평을 요청하였다. 이들의 대체적인 평가는 조건없는 햇볕 정책의 종결을 알린 이명박의 첫 행보는 필요했지만, 남북 간에 직접 대화가 없는 지금은 한국에 손상을 주고 있다며, 한국정부 당국자에게 그러한 메시지를 전달했다고 한다. 남한정부의 정책에 관한 그들의 논평을 구한 것 이외에, 우리는 어떻게 북한 당국자들이 현 상황을 바라볼 것인지에 대한 평가를 요청하였다. 그리고 그들은 국제적 관점에서의 평가도 제공하였다. 
===== 한국의 관점 =====

==== 역할자: ====
 
3. (기밀) 이명박: 남한 대북정책의 열쇠는 이명박과 그의 비서관들의 생각에 있지만, 이명박의 의중이 어디서 나온 것인지에 대해선 견해를 달리하였다. 허문영은 이명박은 통치 이념이 없는 실용주의자이지만, 상대적인 대북 강경 기조는 이명박 주변의 참모진과 보수적인 당국자에서 기인한다며, 특히 김태효 청와대 대외전략비서관을 꼽았다. 박형중은 같은 회동에서 이명박 관련해 견해를 달리하길, 이명박 스스로 대선 중 연설에서 방증하듯이, 북한 정책의 변화에 대해 이명박이 강한 견해를 지녔다고 말하였다; 통일부 폐지는 이명박의 생각이다; 그리고 이명박의 첫 통일부 장관 내정자 경기대학교 남주홍은(그는 부적절한 부동산 투기 협의로 사퇴함) //“극우 보수주의자”//였다.

4. (기밀) 개별 회동에서, 경남대학교 류길재는 허문영의 생각에 동조했는데, 이명박의 발언, 그리고 그가 20년 동안 알고 지내온 김병국 국가안보수석과의 대화로 판단하건대, 이명박 자신은 남북정책의 //“180도”// 변화는 원하지 않지만, 청와대 참모들은(호명하지 않은 채) //“신보수주의자”//들이며, 강성 기조를 밀고 있다고 허문영은 말하였다. 북한 전문가도 아닌 남주홍은 그의 극우적 견해로 보기보다는 이명박의 절친한 친구로 보라고 류길재는 설명하였다. 통일부를 없애려는 시도는 정책의 변화가 아닌 //“노무현과는 정반대”// 정신에 의한 정치적인 행보였다고 덧붙였다. (특히 2007년 10월 남북정상회담은 레임덕 대통령의 도가 지나친 행동으로 보았다.)

5. (기밀) 김병국: 류길재는 김병국 외교안보수석을 통해 //“한국이 북한과의 전략적인 대화가 필요하다.”//라는 점을 이 대통령에게 설득하려는 작업을 시도하고 있다고 말하였다. 그는 북한 관련해 김병국을 핵심적 역할의 인물로 간주하였다; 류길재가 주재한 대부분의 월례 세미나에 김병국은 단골 참석자였기도 하고 해서 북한 현안을 잘 알고 있다. 류길재는 김병국을 강성 기조에 맞서는 청와대의 온건한 세력으로 시사하였다.

6. (기밀) 김하중: 세 명의 학자는 통일부의 몸 사리기에 대해 (이종석 통일부 장관이 외교부 장관보다 더 영향력이 있다고 여겨지던 시절인) 지난 정부에서의 통일부 입지와 현격한 대조를 보인다고 평가하였다. (6년간 중국 대사를 방금 끝마친 경력 외교관인) 김하중 장관은 남북관계를 너무 국제적인 측면에서 바라본다고 허문영은 불평했는데, 김하중은 한국의 이해관계를 참작해야할 필요가 있다고 주장하였다. 류길재는 더 구체적으로 김하중이 장관을 맡은 직후 회동에서, 통일부에 오랫동안 머무르길 원하지 않는다며, 자신을 과도기적인 인사로 칭했다고 말하였다. 그리고 류길재의 평가로는 북한 정책을 //“조용한 외교”//로((번역 주: '선의의 무시'라는 직역도 있다.)) 치부하는 것으로 김하중은 완전히 만족하는 듯 보인다.
 
7. (기밀) 우리가 작년에 회동했을 당시 통일부의 수용적인 태도에 대해 가혹한 비판자였던 류길재는 새로운 접근 방식이 필요한 시점에 북한에 대해 창조적인 생각을 가로막는 김하중의 //“고의적인 침묵”//을 한탄하였다. 예로 김대중 대통령 시절 임동원과 노 대통령 때 이종석 같은 전임 통일부 장관은 해당 대통령에게는 멘토였고, 교육자였지만, 김하중은 그런 역할을 모색하지 않을뿐더러, 이명박도 //“개인적으로 본인에게 중요하지 않은”// 북한에 대해 더 배우려는 의향을 보이지 않고 있다고 류길재는 지적하였다. 
==== 정책 ====

8. (기밀) 한국정부의 대북 접근방식이 //“비이성적인 강경노선 정책”//이라는 북한 전문가, 그리고 일부 국민 사이에 불안이 커지고 있다. 우선 경제 협력에는 비핵화 진척이 요구된다는 점을 분명히 한 점은 옳다. 그러나 단지 북한 주민에 대한 걱정의 발로가 아니라, 남한이 게임에 복귀할 수 있도록 하기 있기 위해서, 지금 한국정부는 인도주의 원조를 제공할 길을 모색할 필요가 있다. 그의 발언은 대화 재계의 필요성을 강조한 류길재 발언과 일맥상통한다. 미국정부가 북한 원조를 제공한다는 언론 보도가 확인된 이후에 세 명 모두 논평을 했는데, 미국의 북한 원조는 남북관계가 “끊겼다.”라는 남한 국민의 인상만 키워줄 뿐이라고 허문영은 말하였다.

9. (기밀) 박형중은 국민과 언론은 갈수록 이명박의 대북 정책이 //“서투르다.”//라고 판단하고 있는데, 부분적으로 대국민 소통이 좋지 않기 때문이다. 국민은 노무현이 구현한 포용정책 방식을 좋아하지 않았지만, 국민은 포용은 계속되기 원한다고 그는 덧붙였다. 다른 말로 하면, 국민은 중도 우파적인 접근방식을 원하지만, 북한과의 대화가 전혀 없는 꼴인 현재의 접근 방식은 지나치게 극우이며, 지난 10년을 벗어난 변화는 너무 급진적이다.

10. (기밀) 북한의 1인당 국민소득을 3,000달러로 올리겠다는 이명박의 //“비핵개방 3000”// 제안에 대해서, 허문영은 북한이 아직 비핵화하지 않았고, 개방 요청을 거부했다는 사실에 집착하지 말아야 하며, 대신에 계획대로 //“움직이기 시작할 방법을 찾아야만”// 한다. 그러나 박형중은 고개를 내저으며, 김정일은 이미 비핵개방3000 계획을 거부했고, 논의하지 않을 거라고 말하였다. 허문영은 김정일의 반대를 극복하기 어렵다는 건 사실이라고 말하면서, 탈북자들은 한국정부가 가난한 북한 주민의 인도적인 요구뿐만이 아니라, 중산층과 지배 계급의 열망에도 부흥할 방법을 개발할 필요가 있다고 박형중에게 상기시켰다.

11. (기밀) 한국정부가 남북 경색 국면을 타개하려면 무엇을 해야만 하냐고 묻자, 류길재는 한국정부가 자체 강경노선을 //“되 집어 봐야”//만 하며, 북한과의 대화 재계 의향을 전달하고, 협력할 영역을 찾아야만 한다. 최악의 시나리오는 냉랭한 관계를 타파하는 한 방법으로 한국정부가 국내 반대를 극복하고 북한에 식량원조 제공을 결정했지만, 북한이 주도권을 잡으려는 방법으로 판단하고 거부할 경우라고 류길재는 경고하였다.
===== 북한의 관점 =====

12. (기밀) 박형중은 북한의 관점에서 가장 상세한 분석을 제공하였다. 그는 북한 당국자들은 한국정부의 접근방식의 급작스런 변화에 충격을 받았다고 보는데, 북한은 이명박의 승리를 예상했지만, 어떤 정부가 됐건 남북관계상에 그간 엄청난 변화를 되돌릴 거라곤 생각하진 못했을 거라고 덧붙였다. 남한의 접근방식의 본질과 (예로 경협이전에 비핵화) 스타일이 변경되었다: 한국정부 당국자들은 김정일을 관례적인 칭호인 //“국방위원회 위원장”//도 없이 김정일을 요즘 지칭하고 있다. 그리고 이명박은 //“7천만”// 한국인 도와야 한다고 반복적으로 지칭하고 있는데, 7천만 이란 용어는 틀림없이 북한 당국자를 불안하게 할 것이다. 김정일은 이명박의 언사에서 위협만 있고, 이득은 없다고 판단할 것이다.

13. (기밀) 박형중은 북한 정부는 미국의 식량원조를 얻는 것을 비롯해 미국과의 관계 개선에 모든 것을 걸고 있다; 한국을 퇴짜 놓으려는 고의적인 결정이다. 노무현 정부하에서, 남한이 쌀 원조를 제공하고, 그 대가로 대화를 계속한다는 북한의 암묵적인 동의가 있었다. 김정일은 그런 방식에 변화를 원하지 않을 것이지만, 한국의 식량원조를 안 받으면 김정일에게 하나의 문제인데, 그 이유는 식량원조가 //“군대와 공무원, 그리고 공장”//에 투입되어 사회 통제를 유지하도록 돕기 때문이라고 박형중은 말하였다.

14. (기밀) 북한의 내부 상황에 대한 평으로, 박형중은 정부와 사회 사이 관계가 최근에 악화하였다고 말하였다. 1990년대 기근이 닥쳤을 때, 정부에 불만의 목소리를 낼 수 있는 //“사회”//가 기본적으로 존재하지 않았지만, 그게 변했다: 북한 주민은 바깥 세계에 대해 더 많이 알고 있다. (북동 해안) 청진에서 시장활동 제한에 두고 시위가 벌어졌다는 최근 비정부기구 보도를 언급하면서, 박형중은 개인적으로 해당 보고를 확인할 수는 없었지만, 그런 시위에 대한 루머조차도 정권의 안정에 위협이라고 말하였다. 북한 정부가 2002년에 일부 경제 부문에서 자유화한 이후에  햇볕정책의 따뜻한 영향력하에 추가적인 자유화가 이어질 거라는 한국 학계의 예상이 무색하게, 2005년 이후 또다시 다시 고삐를 조였기 때문에 북한 주민들이 시위를 했을 거라는 게 설득력이 있다. 그러나 허문영은 북한 정권이 여전히 경제적 어려움을 미국과 남한 탓으로 돌리면서, 북한의 포위 공황상태를 지탱하도록 할 수도 있다.

15. (기밀) 류길재는 북한 당국자들이 대남 정책을 토론한 결과, 이명박 정부와 거래하는 것에 비해, 북미 관계 개선을 이끌 수 있는 미국과의 협상을 지속하는 게 더 생산적이라고 결론 내렸을 거라고 말하였다. 보너스로 미국은 식량원조를 제공할 의지가 있는데, 현재로선 남한을 무시할 여력이 될 수 있다는 의미다. 햇볕정책 10년 동안 북한은 남한을 대하는 방식이 변하지 않았다고 류길재는 말하였다. 남북관계는 보통의 두 국가 간의 관계와는 구별된다. 그리고 북한은 자체 목적을 달성하기 위해서 남한 국민 여론을 동요시키는 걸 비롯해 모든 수단을 이용하는 데 거리낌이 없다. 
===== 국제적 측면 =====

16. (기밀) 우리의 대화 상대역의 논평에서 분명한 점은 이들이 남북문제를 중요한 국제문제로 바라본다는 점이다. 박형중은 한국정부의 강경 기조 입장은 미국의 입지를 강화시키고, 비핵화 관련해 결과를 내도록 돕겠지만(다국적인 노력이 아닌 미국의 입장으로 보는 게 분명하다), 한국이 그 대가를 치를 것이다. 그는 남한국민은 미국이 북한 비핵화에 진척을 이루고 있고, 한·일, 한·중, 그리고 중국·대만 관계 개선 전망 등 국제적인 상황이 아시아에선 대게 개선되고 있다고 보는데, 왜 남북 관계만 발전할 수 없는지 의아해한다. 허문영은 많은 남한 사람들은 새 미국 정부가 전체적인 대북 정책에 어떤 변화를 가려올지, 그리고 북·중관계가 어떻게 전개될지 궁금해하고 있다고 덧붙였다. 미국, 중국, 그리고 일정 부분 일본이 남북관계에서 수행할 역할이 남북관계와 그 결과에 미칠 파장을 한국 학계는 내다보고 있다.
===== 논평 =====

17. (기밀) 이들 학계 인사들은 북한의 행동에 영향을 미치고, 남한에 이득이 될 거라는 잘못된 가정에 바탕을 둔 거라고 말한 바대로, 지난해 노 대통령의 햇볕정책에 대해 충분히 비판적이었다. 그에 따라, 우리는 그들이 특히 비핵화와 일반적인 호혜주의를 강조하면서, 강경노선 기조로의 전환을 축하할 것으로 예상했었다. 실재는 이명박 정부 임기 초반에 일부 보수 학자는 한국정부 당국자들은 경제 원조는 말할 것도 없고, 예로 이산가족 상봉과 납북자, 그리고 한국의 식량분배 감시단 허용 등 원조에 대한 전제 조건의 범위에 대해 이야기하고 있다. 그러나 지난 두 달에 걸쳐서, 한국의 관측통들은 북한이 남한의 전재 조건을 수용하지 않거나 원조를 수락하지 않는 한, 북한이 미국에 구애하는 듯 보이는 가운데 남한을 게임에서 배제할 수 있다는 사실에 짜증을 부리기 시작하였다.  미국이 북한과의 제네바 합의를 한 이후에 처음 등장했던 남한의 신조어인 //“통미봉남”// 이 부활하였다. 그 의미는 남한은 뒤처진 가운데 미국과는 앞을 행해 나아간다는 의미이다. 이런 맥락에서, 유명환 외교부 장관이 북한의 공식 요청이 없어도, 만일 북한의 식량상황이 충분히 심각하다고 판단된다면, 한국정부가 북한에 식량원조를 제공할 수도 있다고 5월 19일에 시사한 건 놀랄 일도 아니다. 
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/10/08seoul1039|프와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 및 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL1039.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EAP/MLS FOR AARON COPE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: AFTER KOREAN REUNIFICATION 
TAGS: KS KN PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: SOUTH-NORTH STANDOFF WORRIES CONSERVATIVE ACADEMICS 
 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Yun. Reasons 1.4(b/d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  Conservative academics criticized former 
President Roh Moo-hyun's North Korea policy as too 
accommodating.  Now they worry that President Lee Myung-bak's 
lack of dialogue with the North means that the ROK will lose 
its influence, while U.S.-DPRK relations improve.    END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C) On May 13 and 15, we met with Ryoo Kihl-jae, Dean of 
Academic Affairs at the Kyungnam University of North Korean 
Studies; Huh Moon-young, Director of North Korean Studies at 
the Korean Institute for National Unification (KINU); and 
Park Hyeung-jung, North Korean Studies Fellow at KINU.  In 
meetings with us last year, these specialists had evaluated 
then-President Roh Moo-hyun's "Peace and Prosperity" policy 
as too accommodating and not effective in changing North 
Korean behavior (reftel), so we asked them to comment on 
President Lee Myung-bak's emerging North Korea policy.  Their 
overall assessment was that Lee's first step -- signaling the 
end of unconditional Sunshine Policy -- was needed, but that 
the lack of direct dialogue between the two Koreas was now 
hurting the ROK; they had conveyed this message to ROKG 
officials.  In addition to seeking their comments on the 
South Korean government's policy, we asked for their 
assessment of how North Korean authorities might see the 
current situation, and they also offered comments on the 
international perspective. 
 
--------------- 
ROK PERSPECTIVE 
--------------- 
 
-- Players: 
 
¶3. (C) LMB:  The key to South Korea's policy toward North 
Korea, all three academics said, was the thinking of 
President Lee Myung-bak and his top officials, but they 
disagreed on where Lee was coming from.  Lee is a pragmatist 
without a governing ideology, Huh said, arguing that the 
relatively hard-line approach toward North Korea arose from 
the conservative officials and advisors around Lee, 
particularly Blue House foreign affairs advisor Kim Tae-hyo, 
Secretary to the President for National Strategy.  Park, at 
the same meeting, disagreed about Lee, saying that Lee 
himself had strong views on changing North Korea policy, as 
evidenced in his campaign speeches; that it was Lee's own 
idea to abolish the Ministry of Unification (MOU); and that 
Lee's first proposed Minister of Unification, Kyeonggi 
University's Nam Jo-hung (who withdrew because of allegations 
of improper real estate deals) was "ultra-conservative." 
 
¶4. (C) In a separate meeting, Kyungnam University's Ryoo 
tended to agree with Huh, saying that from reading Lee's own 
statements and talking to National Security Advisor Kim 
Byung-kook, whom he has known for 20 years, he had concluded 
that Lee himself did not want a "180-degree" change in 
South-North policy, but that Blue House advisors (without 
naming anyone) were "neo-conservatives," pushing a harder 
line.  Ryoo added that Nam Jo-hung had been proposed more as 
a confidant of Lee rather than for his views on North Korea, 
which was not his specialty.  The push to get rid of the MOU 
has been a political move in the spirit of 
"anything-but-Roh," (especially because the October 2007 
Summit was seen as overreaching by the lame-duck President) 
rather than a change in policy. 
 
¶5. (C) Kim Byung-kook:  Ryoo said that he was trying to work 
through National Security Advisor Kim Byung-kook to convince 
President Lee that the "ROK needs a strategic dialogue with 
North Korea."  He regarded Kim Byung-kook as a key player on 
North Korea; he had well-formed views on the issue in part 
because he had been a regular participant in monthly seminars 
on North Korea for years, most of which Ryoo led.  Ryoo 
implied that Kim was a moderating force in the Blue House 
trying to counter harder-line views. 
 
¶6. (C) Kim Ha-joong:  All three academics commented on MOU's 
low profile, in marked contrast to its position the last 
Administration (when MOU Minister Lee Jeong-seok was widely 
seen as more influential than the foreign minister). 
Minister Kim Ha-joong (a career diplomat who just completed 
six years as ROK Ambassador to China) sees the South-North 
situation too much in international terms, Huh complained, 
arguing that Kim needed to take ROK interests into account. 
Ryoo was more specific, saying that in meetings after taking 
office Kim had referred to himself as a transitory figure, 
not wanting to stay at MOU for long, and appeared fully 
content to treat North Korea policy with what Ryoo assessed 
amounted to "benign neglect." 
 
¶7. (C) Ryoo, who was a harsh critic of MOU's overly 
accommodating attitude when we met him last year, lamented 
that Kim's "deliberate silence" was preventing MOU officials 
from thinking creatively about North Korea now, when a new 
approach was needed.  Ryoo noted that past Unification 
Ministers -- such as Lee Jong-seok for President Roh or Lim 
Dong-won for President Kim Dae-jung -- had acted as personal 
mentors and educators for their presidents, but that Kim was 
not seeking such a role, nor was Lee showing an inclination 
to learn more about North Korea, which was "not personally 
important to him." 
 
-- Policy 
 
¶8. (C) There was growing unease among North Korea 
specialists, and to some extent the public, Huh said, that 
the emerging ROKG approach to North Korea was "irrational 
hard-line policy."  The first step, making clear that 
economic cooperation requires progress on denuclearization, 
was right, but now the ROKG needed to find a way to provide 
humanitarian assistance, not so much out of concern for the 
people of North Korea but so that South could get back in the 
game.  His comment was in line with Ryoo's stress on the need 
for restarting dialogue.  All three commented on media 
reports (since confirmed) that the USG would offer food 
assistance to North Korea, with Huh saying that this would 
just reinforce the South Korean public's impression that 
South-North relations had "broken off." 
 
¶9. (C) Park said that the media and public increasingly see 
Lee's North Korea policy as "inept," in part because of bad 
public relations work.  The public didn't like the way Roh 
implemented engagement policy, he added, but they wanted 
engagement to continue.  In other words, the public wanted a 
center-right approach but the current approach, which had 
resulted in no dialogue with the North, was too far right, 
and the change from the last ten years was too abrupt. 
 
¶10. (C) Referring to Lee's "Denuclearization, Openness, 3000 
USD" proposal to raise North Koreans' per capita income, Huh 
said that the ROKG should not get stuck on the fact that 
North Korea had not yet denuclearized and rejected calls for 
it to open up, but should instead "find a way to start 
moving" on the plan.  But Park shook his head, saying that 
Kim Jong-il had already rejected the plan and would not 
discuss it.  Huh said that it was true that Kim Jong-il's 
objections would be hard to overcome, but reminded Park that 
DPRK defectors had emphasized the need for the ROKG to 
develop ways of appealing not only to the humanitarian needs 
of the poorest North Koreans but also the aspirations of the 
middle class and elites. 
 
¶11. (C) Asked what the ROKG should do to break the impasse, 
Ryoo said that the ROKG should "walk back" its hard-line 
policy, convey its intention to resume dialogue with the 
North, and seek areas for cooperation.  Park said that the 
ROKG should realize that its leverage over the DPRK was 
limited. The worst-case scenario, Ryoo warned, was that the 
ROKG would overcome its internal objections and decide to 
offer food aid to the North, as a way of breaking the ice, 
but the DPRK would refuse, seeing that as a way to keep the 
upper hand. 
 
---------------- 
DPRK PERSPECTIVE 
---------------- 
 
¶12. (C) Park offered the most detailed analysis of North 
Korea's perspective.  He saw DPRK authorities shocked at the 
sudden change in the ROKG's approach, even though they had 
seen Lee's victory coming, but he added that any government 
would pull back given such a seismic change in relations. 
Both the substance (e.g., denuclearization before economic 
cooperation) and style of the South's approach had changed: 
ROKG officials were now referring to Kim Jong-il without the 
customary title of "Chairman of the National Defense 
Commission," and Lee repeatedly referred to helping the "70 
million" Koreans, a term that was bound to unnerve North 
Korean authorities.  Kim Jong-il saw threats, but no 
benefits, in Lee's rhetoric. 
 
¶13. (C) Park said that the DPRK government was now betting 
everything on improving relations with the United States, 
including getting U.S. food aid; there was a deliberate 
decision to freeze the ROK out.  Under the Roh government, 
the tacit arrangement was that the South provided rice aid 
(technically as a loan) in exchange for the North's agreement 
to continue talking.  Kim Jong-il would not want to change 
that arrangement, Park said, but he added that not having ROK 
food aid was a problem for Kim Jong-il because the aid, 
funneled to the "army, officials and factories," had helped 
maintain control of society. 
 
¶14. (C) Commenting on the DPRK's internal situation (his 
research field), Park said that relations between society and 
government had deteriorated recently.  In the 1990s, when 
famine struck, there was essentially no "society" that could 
voice its displeasure to the government, but that had 
changed:  the DPRK public knew more about the outside world 
and was willing to protest.  Noting recent NGO reports that 
thousands of women had demonstrated in Chongchin (northeast 
coast) over restrictions on market activity, Park said that 
he had not been able to personally verify those reports but 
that even rumors of such demonstrations were a threat to 
regime stability.  It was plausible that people were 
protesting because the DPRK government, after liberalizing 
some economic areas in 2002, had tightened up again after 
2005, belying ROK academics' predictions that further 
liberalization would folow, under the warm influence of 
Sunshine Policy.  But Huh commented that the DPRK regime was 
still able to blame economic hardships on the U.S. and South 
Korea, propping up North Korea's siege mentality. 
 
¶15. (C) Ryoo said he believed that the DPRK authorities had 
debated their policy toward the South and concluded that, 
compared to dealing with the Lee government, it would be more 
fruitful to continue negotiations with the U.S., which could 
lead to improved relations.  A bonus point wa that the U.S. 
was also willing to provide food aid, meaning that the DPRK 
could afford to snub the South for now.  More generally, Ryoo 
said that the DPRK had not changed the way it related to the 
South during the ten years of Sunshine Policy.  South-North 
relations were not the same as those between two normal 
countries, and the North felt free to use all means, 
including swaying South Korean public opinion, to accomplish 
its goals. 
 
----------------------- 
INTERNATIONAL DIMENSION 
----------------------- 
 
¶16. (C) It was clear from our interlocutors' comments that 
they see South-North issues as having important international 
aspects.  Park argued that the ROKG's hard-line position 
strengthened the U.S. position, helping bring about results 
on denuclearization (seeing this as a U.S. rather than 
multilateral effort, apparently), but at a cost to the ROK. 
He added that the South Korean public sees the international 
situation generally improving in Asia, with the U.S. making 
progress on DPRK denuclearization and the prospect of 
improved ROK-Japan, ROK-China, and China-Taiwan relations, 
and wonders why South and North can't make progress.  Huh 
added that many South Koreans wonder what overall changes to 
North Korea policy a new U.S. administration will bring, and 
how China-DPRK relations are evolving.  The implication is 
that ROK academics see the U.S., China and to some extent 
Japan playing a role in South-North relations and outcomes. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶17. (C) These academics were critical enough of President 
Roh's version of Sunshine Policy last year -- saying it was 
premised on false assumptions about influencing North Korean 
behavior and benefits to the South.  Accordingly, we expected 
them to celebrate the shift to a harder-line stance, 
emphasizing denuclearization in particular and reciprocity in 
 
general.  Indeed, during the first days of the Lee 
Adminstration, some conservative academics and ROKG officials 
were talking about a range of pre-conditions for aid -- such 
as progress on family reunions and POWs and allowing ROK 
monitors -- not to mention economic assistance.  But over the 
last two months, ROK observers have begun to chafe at the 
fact that North Korea, as long as it does not accept the 
South's pre-conditions or even deign to ask for aid, can keep 
the South locked out of the game while it appears to woo the 
U.S.  The media has resurrected a South Korean neologism 
first used after the U.S. reached the Agreed Framework with 
the DPRK:  "tong-mi-pong-nam," which means going forward with 
the U.S. while the South is left behind.  In this context, 
it's not surprising that Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan 
hinted on May 19 that the ROKG may provide food aid to the 
North, even without an official DPRK request, if the food 
situation in the North is deemed serious enough. 
 
VERSHBOW
</file>