^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL1845  |  2008-09-17 07:14  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PBTS PGOV PHSA PINS MARR KS KN }}  |
====== 제 목: 세드니 차관보 외교통상부 북미 국장과 회동 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 001845 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 09/17/2018 
태그: PBTS(([National Boundaries, Territories, and Sovereignty])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PHSA(([High Seas Affairs])), PINS(([National Security])), MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)]))
제 목: 세드니 차관보 외교통상부 북미 국장과 회동 
참조: 가. 가) SECSTATE 95545 (SCAP LUNCH) 나. 나) SECSTATE 96122 (IRAQ COALITION DEMARCHE) 
분류자: 정치 공사 참사관 조셉 윤((POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun)).  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/08/19 23:45//
===== 요약 =====

1. (기밀) 요약: 9월 11일 데이비드 세드니 차관보는 커트 통 동아태/한국과장과 함께 장호진 외교통상부 북미 국장의 사무실에 방문하였다. 그들은 9월 10일 한미 안보정책구상회의가 잘되었지만 몇 가지 쟁점―기지 반환과 방위비 분담금 협상이―여전히 난제라고 견해를 같이하였다. 장호진은 연합방위력증강사업 기금 문제가 해결되었다는 기쁜 소식을 접했다며 그 점이 9월 24~25일 방위비 분담금 특별협상을 더 성공적으로 이끄는 데 도움이 될 거라고 예견하였다. 그는 기지 반환 문제에 대해 주둔군 지위 협정의 한도 내에서 환경 평가를 개선하는 과정에서 양측이 어떤 시도를 하고 있는지 정확히 설명하였다. 장호진은 한미 군사연습에 중국이 참관하도록 초대하는 문제에 대해 참관인 수는 문제가 되지 않는 수준에서 조정돼야 하되 미국과의 추가적인 협의를 보장하기로 합의했다. 그는 2008년 이후로는 한국에 이라크 파병을 연장해 달라고 요구하지 않을 거라는 뉴스를 환영하는 듯 보였지만, 어떻게 그런 결정이 나왔는지를 묻는 공개적인 질문에 어떻게 대응할지 조바심쳤다. 동아태/한국과장 통은 회동의 끝자락에 10월 초 예고된 백악관의 새 회원국 가입 발표에 앞서 한국이 남은 비자 면제 문제를 해결하기 위한 노력을 강화해 달라고 촉구하였다. 요약 끝.

2. (기밀) 9월 11일에 데이비드 세드니 국방성 동아시아 부차관보는 커트 통 국무부 동아태/한국과장과 함께 장호진 외교통상부 북미 국장의 사무실을 잠시 방문하였다. 그들은 9월 10일 19차 한미 안보정책구상회의의 경과가 좋되 몇 가지 문제가―특히 기지 반환과 새로운 방위비 분담금 특별협상이―난제로 남아 있다고 견해를 같이하였다. 장 국장은 우리가 두 영역에서 공동의 성공을 거둘 필요가 있다고 했다. 그는 문제 해결이 가능하지만, 어려울 것이라고 말하였다.

===== 연합방위력증강사업/방위비 분담금 특별협정 =====

3. (기밀) 장 국장은 연합방위력증강사업의 기금 부족 문제 해결에 좋은 진전이 있다고 들었다고 보고하였다. 9월 24~25일에 있을 다음 방위비 분담금 협상이 그 소식 덕분에 더 낳아질 거라고 그는 예견하였다. 세드니는 방위비 분담금 협상에 앞서 연합방위력증강사업이 해결되는 것이 방위비 분담금 특별협정이 성공하는 열쇠라고 견해를 같이하였다.

===== 기지 반환 =====

4. (기밀) 장호진은 기지 반환에 관한 개선된 공동환경평가과정을 개발하자는 주한미군의 제안은 좋은 일이라고 말하였다. 그러나 공동환경평가는 한국의 법이 아닌, 미국 법에 뿌리를 둔 위험평가에 기초해야 한다고 지적하였다. 그는 한국의 환경부는 미국 규정에 친숙하지 않다며 주한미군이 특별히 신경을 써서 한국 측에 설명해야 한다고 요청하였다. 장 국장과 데이비드 세드니는 양측이 특정 한도 내에서 (기지 오염 치유에 대한) 개선이 이뤄지도록 하는 중이며 융통성의 여지가 있지만, 한미 주둔군 지위협정에 적시된 권한과 책임으로 말미암아 우리가 결국에 개선 과정에서 합의할 수 있는 변경 폭이 제한적이라는 견해를 같이하였다. 장호진은 그 점을 분명하게 파악하고 있음을 시사하였다. 한국이 만일 주한주둔군지위협정의 기준을 벗어나는 환경 조치를 원한다면, 한국이 나중에 국내법에 따라 한미 주둔군 지위협정을 변경하게 되더라도 한국은 해당 환경 조치에 따른 비용을 치러야만 할 것이다.

===== 중국: 전략적 협력 =====

5. (기밀) 세드니는 9월 2일 외교통상부 권종락 차관과 함께한 동맹 동반자 관계를 위한 전략 대화에서 중국 인민해방군 당국자가 한미 군사 연습에 참관하도록 허용할 가능성에 관한 참조 전문 논의를 언급했다. 그는 어제 국방부 전 실장이 했던 것과 같은 대언론 성명이 아닌 미국과의 협의를 촉구하였다. 세드니는 그러한 인민 해방군의 참관이 북한에 신호를 보낸다는 측면에서 어느 정도 가치가 있다고 볼 수 있다고 말하였다. 그러나 우리가 중국의 참관을 허용할 것인지 허용한다면 어떻게 할 것인지 협의하는 게 중요하다. 장호진은 협의 필요성에 대해 수긍하였다.

===== 이라크 연합군의 변화 =====

6. (기밀) 루트 장군이 한국 외교안보수석실 대표에게 전화를 걸어 한국의 이라크 파병이 올해 말을 끝으로 더는 필요하지 않을 것을 한국 사람들과 미 관계자에게 전한 점을 장호진 국장이 언급하면서 언제 이라크 정부가 공개 발표할 계획인지 물었다. 커트 통 동아태/한국과장은 크리스 힐 동아태 차관보가 철군 결정을 주미 한국 대사에게 9월 9일 전달했다고 말했다. 그는 또 버시바우 대사가 같은 메시지를 9월 10일 한국 국방부에 전달했으며 9월 11일 중에 이명박 대통령에게도 전달하게 될 거라고 말했다. 이라크 정부의 공개 발표 문제에 대해선 이라크 정부에 달린 문제인 만큼 이라크 정부 쪽에서 발표가 나올 거라고 통 과장은 조언하였다.

7. (기밀) 장호진은 한국 정부가 우려하는 두 가지 대표적인 사안을 열거하였다: 1) 철군 소식에 당황하지 말아야 한다. 그리고 2) 한국군이 이라크를 떠나야 한다는 결정이 (이라크 정부가 아닌) 미국의 일방적인 판단이라는 인상을 주지 않는 발표가 주가 되어야 한다. 세드니 부차관보는 연합군 주둔의 미래는 미국의 결정이 아니라 이라크의 결정이라고 지적하였다. 여기서 핵심은 이라크의 상황이 나아진 관계로 미국이나 다른 연합군 당사국이 자국 병력을 감축할 수 있게 되었다는 점이다. 이는 우리 모두의 성공이다. 세드니는 한국의 공헌에 감사하였다. 대사관 정치군사팀장은 (국회가 이라크 파병을 2008년까지 연장하는 법안을 통과시킬 당시 조건에 따라) 한국이 올해 말 한국 병력을 철군하기로 이미 결정한 관계로 이라크 정부의 발표는 한국 정부의 입장을 존중한 발표라고 덧붙였다.

8. (기밀) 장호진은 왜 일부 국가들은 특히 에스토니아가 다른 국가들과는 다르게 이라크에 머물도록 요청을 받았는지 물었다. 세드니 부차관보는 해당 결정들은 이라크 정부의 필요에 따른 판단에 근거한 결정이라고 대답하였다. 이라크 정부의 결정은 이라크 안보 여건에 기반을 둔 결정이기 때문에 세드니 자신이 이라크 정부를 대변해서 얘기할 수는 없다고 말하였다. 장호진은 “성공적인 복귀”에 기쁘다고 대답했지만, 부정적인 정치적 파장 가능성에 대비해야 한다고 설명하였다. 장호진은 애초에 파병을 반대하였던 사람들이 바로 (철군에 대해) 비판할 사람들이라고 인정하였다. 세드니는 미국 정부는 한국의 공헌에 사의와 존경을 표한다고 다시 한 번 강조하였다. 세드니는 회의 막판에 이뤄진 일대일 대화에서 미국은 한국의 더 많은 아프간 지원을 타진할 것으로 예상한다고 장호진에게 말하였다. 세드니는 한국에서 아프가니스탄 문제가 정치적으로 민감하다는 점을 인정하면서도 한국민이 아프간 지원을 수긍케 할 방책을 장호진과 외교부 사람들이 모색하라고 제안하였다.

===== 비자 면제는 최종 단계 =====

9. (기밀) 커트 통은 이번 회의의 마감 과정에서 잠시 틈을 내 한국 정부가 비자 면제 프로그램에 가입하려면 시간이 절대적으로 중요하다고 강조했다. 왜냐면 백악관이 비자 면제 프로그램에 가입하도록 초대할 신규 회원국에 관한 발표를 10월 초에 하기로 계획이 잡혀있기 때문이라고 강조하였다. 그는 한국 정부가 남은 모든 문제를 해결하기 위해 적절한 미국 상대역과 협력해야 한다고 촉구하였다. 그는 징역 1년을 심각한 범죄행위로 정의할지가 핵심 난제라고 지적했다. 아울러 미국과 한국이 그 점에 대 합의할 수 있다면 나머지는 꽤 신속하게 제자리를 찾게 될 수밖에 없다고 덧붙였다.

10. (미분류) 동 보고는 세드니 차관보가 승인하였다.
버시바우
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/11/08seoul1845|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전제를 금지합니다

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL1845.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001845 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2018 
TAGS: PBTS PGOV PHSA PINS MARR KS KN
SUBJECT: DASD SEDNEY MEETING WITH MOFAT NORTH AMERICA DG 
 
REF: A. REF: A) SECSTATE 95545 (SCAP LUNCH) 
     ¶B. B) SECSTATE 96122 (IRAQ COALITION DEMARCHE) 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun REASONS 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1. (CO) SUMMARY:  On September 11, DASD David Sedney and 
EAP/K Director Kurt Tong paid an office call on MOFAT North 
American Affairs DG Chang Ho-jin.  They agreed that the 
September 10 Security Policy Initiative talks had gone well, 
but that several issues -- camp returns and the SMA 
burden-sharing negotiation -- still posed difficult 
challenges.  Chang reported hearing good news regarding 
resolution of the Combined Defense Improvements Project 
(CDIP) funding problem and predicted that would help make the 
September 24-25 SMAQegotiations more successful.  On camp 
returns, he correctly described what the two sides were 
trying to do as making improvements to the environmental 
assessment process within the range of SOFA limitations.  On 
the question of inviting the Chinese to observe U.S.-ROK 
military exercises, Chang assured that the level of the 
observers would be calibrated so as not to raise concerns, 
but agreed that further consultations with the U.S. were 
warranted.  He appeared to welcome the news that the ROK 
would not be asked to extend its troop presence in Iraq 
beyond 2008 but fretted about dealing with public questions 
about how the decision had been made.  At the end of the 
meeting EAP/K Director Tong urged the ROK to accelerate its 
efforts to resolve remaining Visa Waiver issues prior to the 
planned White House announcement on new entrants in early 
October.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (CO) On September 11, David Sedney, Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for East Asia and EAP/K Director Kurt 
Tong paid a brief office call on Chang Ho-jin, the North 
American Bureau Director General at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (MOFAT).  They agreed that the September 10 
Security Policy Initiative talks (SPI-19) had gone well, but 
that several issues -- particularly camp returns and the 
negotiation of a new Special Measures Agreement (SMA) -- 
remained as difficult challenges.  DG Chang stated that we 
would need to achieve joint success in both areas.  He said 
that was possible, but would be difficult. 
 
CDIP/SMA 
-------- 
 
¶3. (CO) Director General Chang reported that he had heard 
that good progress had been made on resolving the Combined 
Defense Improvements Project (CDIP) funding shortfall issue. 
That would make the next round of SMA negotiations on 
September 24-25 better, he predicted.  Sedney agreed that 
resolution of CDIP before the SMA talks is key to success on 
SMA. 
 
CAMP RETURNS 
------------ 
 
¶4. (CO) Chang said the USFK-proposal to develop an improved 
joint environmental assessment process for camp returns was a 
good thing.  He pointed out, however, that the joint 
assessment would be based on a risk assessment rooted in U.S. 
regulations, not ROK law.  He said the ROK Ministry of the 
Environment (MOE) was not so familiar with the U.S. 
regulations and asked that U.S. Forces Korea (USFK) take 
particular care to explain it to them.  DG Chang and DASD 
Sedney agreed that both sides were attempting to make 
improvements within a certain range of limitations, and that 
while there was room for flexibility, the authorities and 
responsibilities set forth in the Status of Forces Agreement 
(SOFA) limited the amount of change we could ultimately agree 
to make in the process.  Chang indicated that he clearly 
understood that. If the ROK wanted environmental measures 
beyond the SOFA standards, to address post-SOFA changes in 
ROK domestic law, the ROK would have to pay for those 
measures. 
 
CHINA:  STRATEGIC COOPERATION 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. (CO) Referring to reftel discussion with MOFAT Vice 
Foreign Minister Kwon at the Strategic Consultation on Allied 
Partnership (SCAP) talks on September 2 about the possibility 
of allowing Chinese People's Liberation Army officers to 
observe U.S.-ROK military exercises, DASD Sedney urged 
consultations, rather than statements to the press, as made 
the day before by MND DM Jeon.  Sedney said that he could see 
some value to such PRC observation in sending signals to the 
DPRK.  However, it is important that we consult bilaterally 
if and how to do this.  Chang acknowledged that consultations 
were necessary. 
 
CHANGES IN IRAQ COALITION 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (CO) Noting that Gen Lute had called ROK representative to 
the NSC to tell the ROK and others that the ROK's dispatch of 
troops to Iraq would no longer be necessary at the end of 
this year, DG Chang asked when the Government of Iraq planned 
to make the public announcement.  EAP/K Director Kurt Tong 
stated that EAP Assistant Secretary of State Chris Hill had 
passed along the content of the decision to the ROK 
Ambassador to Washington on September 9, and that Ambassador 
Vershbow had delivered the same message to the ROK Minister 
of National Defense on September 10 and would be doing so 
with President Lee Myung-bak later in the day on September 
¶11.  As for the public announcement, that was up to the 
Government of Iraq and would be coming out of Baghdad, Tong 
advised. 
 
¶7. (CO) Chang enumerated two primary concerns of the ROKG: 
1) that it not be embarrassed by the news, and 2) that the 
substance of the announcement avoid giving the impression 
that the U.S. (rather than the GOI) had made a unilateral 
decision that the ROK troops should leave.  DASD Sedney 
pointed out that the future of the coalition presence was an 
Iraqi, not a U.S. decision. The key here was that progress in 
Iraq is enabling the U.S. and other Coalition partners to 
draw down their forces.  This is a success for all of us. 
Sedney thanked the ROK for its contributions.  The Embassy 
POL-MIL chief added that since the ROK had already decided to 
remove its troops from Iraq at the end of the year (as a 
condition when the National Assembly passed the law extending 
their presence through 2008), the announcement by the 
Government of Iraq was respectful of the ROKG position. 
 
¶8. (CO) Chang asked why some countries, especially Estonia, 
had been asked to stay on in Iraq while others had not.  DASD 
Sedney replied that those decisions were based on the Iraqi 
government's judgment of its needs.  As these were Iraqi 
government decisions based on Iraqi security requirements, 
and he could not speak for the Government of Iraq, Sedney 
said.  Chang replied that the ROK was happy to "return on 
success," but explained that he had to prepare for all 
possible negative political spin.  Chang acknowledged that 
those who would make such criticism were those who had 
opposed the initial deployments.  Sedney again stressed the 
USG's respect for and appreciation of the ROK contribution. 
In a one-on-one conversation at the end of the meeting, 
Sedney told Chang that he expected the U.S. would be seeking 
more support for Afghanistan from Korea.  Acknowledging the 
political sensitivity in the ROK on Afghanistan, Sedney 
suggested Chang and the MFA look for ways to prepare the ROK 
people for such assistance. 
 
FINAL STEPS FOR VISA WAIVER 
--------------------------- 
 
 
¶9. (CO) At the conclusion of the meeting Kurt Tong took a few 
moments to stress that time is of the essence on the ROK's 
accession to the Visa Waiver Program because the White House 
planned to make an announcement in early October regarding 
the new countries that would be invited to join the program. 
He urged that the ROKG work with appropriate U.S. 
counterparts to resolve all the remaining issues.  He pointed 
to the one-year definition of serious crimes as a key 
sticking point, adding that if the U.S. and ROK can reach an 
agreement on that, the rest should fall fairly quickly into 
place. 
 
¶10. (UN) This report has been cleared by DASD Sedney. 
VERSHBOW
</file>