^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL878  |  2008-04-29 08:37  |  미분류/공무외 사용금지  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>KS PHUM PREL UNGA }}  |
====== 제 목: 한국정부 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 선거 재선을 목표로 미국의 지지 요청 ======
  * 미분류 SEOUL 000878 
  * 국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
  * 민감함
  * 국방부망 배포
  * 행정명령 12958: 해당없음((N/A))
  * 태그: KS(([Korea (South)])), PHUM(([Human Rights])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), UNGA(([UN General Assembly])) 
  * 제 목: 한국정부 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 선거 재선을 목표로 미국의 지지 요청
  * 참조: 가. [[07seoul2042|2007 SEOUL 2042]] 나. 2007 SEOUL 2735 다. 2007 SEOUL 3022 라. [[07seoul3326|2007 SEOUL 3326]] 마. [[08seoul561|2008 SEOUL 561]]    
  * 번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2013/02/25 22:15//

1. (민감하지만 미분류) 요점: 대한민국 외교통상부는 5월 유엔 총회에서 2008-2011년 임기의 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 재선을 위한 미국정부의 지원을 요청하는 편지를 국무장관에게 보냈다. 권고: 대사관은 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 지휘를 활용해 여러 다른 인권 문제에 대한 한국정부의 꾸준한 관심을 비롯해 북한 인권 문제에 대한 주의를 환기하려는 한국정부의 의지를 지적하는 등 해당 요청을 지지하고 있다. 그리고 한국정부가 최근 유엔 여러 직책의 미국정부 후보를 지지했음을 지적하기도 하였다. (참조 전문) //요점 끝.//

2. (민감하지만 미분류) 라이스 국무장관에 보내는 유명환 장관의 서신 시작:

2008년 4월 12일

라이스 장관 귀하,

저는 대한민국이 2008~2011년 임기의 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 재선을 위해 입후보한 사실을 전하게 됨을 영광스럽게 생각합니다. 이번 이사국 선거는 2008년 5월 제62차 유엔 총회에서 개최될 예정입니다.
 
지난 60년 동안에, 대한민국은 인권의 옹호할 뿐만 아니라, 번성하는 민주주의 국가로써 국제적 위상을 공고히 다지기 위해서 끊임없는 노력을 기울여왔습니다. 한국은 인권 보호와 신장에 헌신적으로 이바지해왔습니다. 특히 인권이사회 처음으로 이사국이 된 대한민국은 인권이사회의 조직 기반을 설립하는데 건설적인 역할을 수행해왔습니다. 한국은 인권이사회의 발전뿐만이 아니라, 인권과 자유의 저변을 신장하기 위해 지속적으로 참여하길 희망하고 있습니다. 

그런 점에서, 만일 귀하의 존경하는 정부가 대한민국의 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 출마에 귀중한 지지를 보내 줄 수 있다면, 한국정부는 대단히 감사하게 생각할 것입니다.

귀하에 대하여 본인의 정중한 경의를 표합니다.

유명환

콘돌리자 라이스
국무부 장관 귀하
미합중국
워싱턴 디시

서신 끝.
 
3. (민감하지만 미분류) 2008년 4월 25월 정부 공한 시작:

OIG - 122 

대한민국의 외교통상부 장관은 미합중국 대사관에 경의를 표하며, 2008년 5월 제62차 유엔 총회 기간 중에 개최될 2008-2001 임기의 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 선거에 대한민국이 재선을 위하여 입후보한다는 소식을 전하게 됨을 영광으로 생각합니다.

외교통상부는 이번 기회를 통해 대한민국의 유엔 인권이사회 이사국 입후보에 대한 지지를 모색하고자, 미합중국 콘돌리자 라이스 국무부 장관 귀하를 수취인으로 한 외교통상부 유명환 장관 귀하의 서신 사본을 동봉합니다.

대한민국 정부는 자국의 유엔 인권이사회 입후보에 대한 미합중국 정부의 귀중한 지지 표명에 대단히 감사하게 생각할 것입니다.
 
대한민국 외교통상부는 이번 일을 기회로 삼아 미합중국대사관에 대하여 거듭 정중한 경의를 표합니다.

외교통상부 대한민국 서울
2008년 4월 25일

정부 공한 끝.
//버시바우//
프와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 및 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL878.rtf>
UNCLAS SEOUL 000878 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KS [Korea (South)], PHUM [Human Rights], PREL [External Political Relations], UNGA [UN General Assembly] 
SUBJECT: ROKG REQUESTS USG SUPPORT FOR RE-ELECTION TO HUMAN 
RIGHTS COUNCIL 
 
REF: A. 2007 SEOUL 2042 
 
     B. 2007 SEOUL 2735 
     C. 2007 SEOUL 3022 
     D. 2007 SEOUL 3326 
     E. 2008 SEOUL 561 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade has 
written to the Secretary of State to request that the USG 
support the ROKG's re-election to the UN Human Rights Council 
(HRC) for the 2008-2011 term at the UN General Assembly in 
May (see text below).  Recommendation:  Post supports the 
request, noting the ROKG's willingness to use it membership 
on the HRC to call attention to North Korean human rights 
issues, as well as its conscientious attention to other 
global human rights issues, and noting that the ROKG has 
recently supported USG candidates for UN positions (reftels). 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin text of FM Yu's letter to Secretary Rice: 
 
April 12, 2008 
 
Excellency: 
 
I have the honour to refer to the candidature of the Republic 
of Korea for re-election to the UN Human Rights Council for 
the 2008-2011 period, the elections for which will be held 
during the 62nd UN General Assembly Session in May 2008. 
 
Over the last six decades, the Republic of Korea has 
constantly endeavoured to firmly establish its international 
standing as a thriving democracy as well as a human rights 
advocate. It is fully committed to contributing to the 
promotion and protection of human rights. 
 
In particular, as a first-term Human Rights Council member, 
the Republic of Korea has played a constructive role in 
establishing the institutional basis for the Council. It 
hopes to continue to participate in the enhancement of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms as well as in the development 
of the Council. 
 
In this regard, it would be highly appreciated if your 
esteemed government could render its valuable support for the 
candidature of the Republic of Korea to the Human Rights 
Council. 
 
Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest 
consideration. 
 
      Yu, Myung-hwan 
 
Her Excellency 
      Condoleezza Rice, 
      Secretary of State, 
      United States of America, 
      Washington, D.C. 
 
End text of letter. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Begin text of April 25, 2008 Diplomatic Note: 
 
OIG - 122 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of 
Korea presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United 
States of America and has the honour to inform the latter 
that the Republic of Korea is standing for re-election to the 
UN Human Rights Council for the term 2008-2011 at the 
elections to be held during the 62nd Session of the UN 
General Assembly in May 2008. 
 
The Ministry takes this opportunity to enclose a copy of the 
letter from His Excellency, Yu, Myung-hwan, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea addressed 
to Her Excellency, Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State of 
the United States of America, seeking support for the 
candidature of the Republic of Korea to the Human Rights 
Council. 
 
The Government of the Republic of Korea would highly 
appreciate the valuable support of the Government of the 
United States of America for the candidature of the ROK to 
the Human Rights Council. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of 
Korea avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the 
Embassy of the United States of America the assurances of its 
highest consideration. 
 
April 25, 2008 
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE SEOUL, KOREA 
 
End text of Diplomatic Note. 
VERSHBOW
</file>