====== 제 목: 한일 정상회담 후속 조치: 미래를 내다보지만 발을 내디디지는 않아 ======

작성일 : 2008년 5월 2일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000919 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: AFTER KOREAN REUNIFICATION 
TAGS: PGOV PREL JP KS KN
SUBJECT: KOREA-JAPAN POST SUMMIT: LOOKING FORWARD BUT NOT 
MOVING FORWARD 

Classified By: A/POL Brian McFeeters. Reasons 1.4(b/d) 

요약: 2월 취임식에서 이명박 한국 대통령은 일관되게 일본과 관계의 미래에 초점을 맞추겠다고 말했다. 과거 문제들에 안주하지 않겠다는 것이었다. 짧은 기간 동안 이미 2차례 일본 수상 후쿠다와 정상회담을 가진 것은 이대통령이 그의 말을 행동으로 뒷받침하고 있다는 하나의 분명한 신호이다. 외교통상부의 일본국장인 주중철은 4월 21일 이명박-후쿠다 정상회담이 양자 관계에 있어 우호적인 분위기를 조성한 것으로 묘사했다. 그러나 그의 발언의 나머지 부분들은 한국정부가 그런 관계 변화를 성급하게 추진하지 않을 것이라는 의미를 담고 있었다. 대신 한국 정부는 정치적인 측면에서 조심스럽게 일을 진행할 것이다. 후쿠다 정치적인 향후 행보가 불확실하기도 하고, 일본이 한국 대중들을 자극할 과거 문제에 대해 어떤 발언이나 행동을 할 수도 있기 때문이다. 경제 측면에서도 비슷하게 한국정부는 공동성명에서FTA 협상을 신속하게 시작하자는 일본정부의 요청을 거부했다. 한국의 기업들, 특히 “현대 같은 재벌들”은 일본의 제조업체들이 한국에 들어오는 것을 허용하기를 꺼리고, 일본이 그들의 농산물 시장을 개방할 의향이 없다는 점이 분명하기 때문이다. 예상되는 결과는 양국관계에 대해 좀 더 좋은 분위기를 만드는 것이지, 현재로서는 실질적인 변화는 거의 없다.


¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Since his inauguration in February, ROK 
President Lee Myung-bak has consistently said that he intends 
to focus on the future of relations with Japan and not dwell 
on past issues. Holding two summits with Japanese Prime 
Minister Fukuda already within his short time in office is 
one clear sign that President Lee is backing up his words 
with actions. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade's 
Director for Japan, Joo Joong-chul, described the April 21 
Lee-Fukuda Summit as setting a favorable tone for the 
bilateral relationship, but the remainder of his comments 
conveyed the sense that the ROKG was not eager to rush 
forward to make changes. Instead, the ROKG would proceed 
cautiously on the political side both because they were 
unsure of Fukuda's political prospects and because of concern 
that Japan could say or do something about historical issues 
that would irritate the Korean public. On the economic side, 
similarly, the ROKG had resisted GOJ calls to talk about jump 
starting FTA negotiations in their joint statement, because 
ROK companies, particularl "chaebols like Hyundai," were 
reluctant to allow Japanese manufacturing into the ROK, and 
it was clear that Japan had no intention to open its 
agriculture market. The likely result was a better tone to 
the relationship but few substantive changes, for now. 


이명박의 전향적 사고와 맞서는 몇몇 기관들이 한국에 있다. 전임 진보 정권에 의해 설립된 것들로 과거를 돌아다보고 20세기 일본과 한국의 관계를 상세히 조명하기 위해 필요로 했던 기관들이다. 일본에서 후쿠다 수상에 대한 대중들의 정서가 좋지 않게 변하고, 한국의 싱크탱크들이 계속해 역사적 적대 문제를 제기하는 와중에서 이명박과 후쿠다 수상이 미래 문제에 초점을 맞추기로 한 것은 외교와 긴밀한 협력을 주고 받자는 아이디어를 강화시킴에 따라 강한 시험의 대상이 될 것이다. 

¶2. (SBU) Standing at odds with Lee's forward thinking are 
several institutions in Korea, founded under the previous 
liberal administrations, which are specifically required to 
look at the past and bring to light details of Japan's 
relationswith Korea throughout the 20th century. As public 
sentiment for Prime Minister Fukuda erodes in Japan and 
Korean think tanks continue to raise historical animosities, 
President Lee's and Prime Minister Fukuda's willingness to 
focus on the future will be strongly tested as they both work 
to reinvigorate the idea of shuttle diplomacy and closer 
cooperation. END SUMMARY. 

------------------------ 
LEE REACHES OUT TO JAPAN 
------------------------ 
이명박 일본에 손을 내밀다 
취임 연설에서 이명박은 “우리는 아시아를 향한 우리의 정책에 중요성을 부여할 것이다”라고 말했다. 특히 우리는 일본 중국 러시아를 포함하는 가까운 이웃들과 평화, 상호 번영을 모색할 것이고, 그들과 교류, 협력을 촉진할 것이다. 공식적으로 임기를 시작하기 전에도 당선자는 그의 형인 이상득 국회 부의장을 1월 일본에 특사로 보냈다. 일본은 이에 화답해 후쿠다 수상이 2월 이명박의 취임식 초청을 수락했다. 이명박은 또 당시 일본 주재 대사이던 유명환을 그의 외교장관으로 임명했다. 외교부는 일본 문제를 외교부 고위 차원에서 열린 마음을 갖고 의제로 삼게 될 것이다. 

¶3. (SBU) In Lee's inauguration speech, he said that "We will 
attach importance to our policy towards Asia. In particular, 
we will seek peace and mutual prosperity with our close 
neighbors, including Japan, China and Russia and promote 
further exchange and cooperation with them." Even prior to 
officially taking office, the president-elect sent his 
brother, National Assembly Vice Speaker Lee Sang-deuk to 
Tokyo as his special envoy in January. The Japanese 
responded favorably and Prime Minister Fukuda accepted the 
invitation to attend Lee's inauguration in February. Lee 
also appointed then Ambassador to Japan Yu Myung-hwan as his 
Foreign Minister which is likely to keep Japan issues on the 
agenda with a sympathetic ear at the top of MOFAT. 

4월 21일 일본에서 한일 정상회담에 이어 후쿠다는 그의 첫 번째 해외방문으로 일본을 찾은 데 대해 감사를 표했다. 후쿠다는 “이는 이대통령의 정책이 일본과 관계를 우선한다는 점을 보여준 것”이라고 말했다. 두 지도자는 “셔틀 외교”를 재개한다는 데 대해 합의했다. 두 나라 정상 간에 일년에 최소 한번 상호 방문을 하자는 것이다. 이 같은 회담을 개최하자는 합의는 2005년 일본 수상 고이즈미가 야스쿠니 신사를 참배했을 때 중단됐다. 당시 사태는 노대통령이 시위 와중에서 일본 방문을 취소하게 만들었다. 4월 정상회담에 이어 후쿠다는 일본 한국 관계의 새 시대를 열기를 원한다고 말했다. 반면 이대통령은 “역사적 진실이 무시돼서는 안 된다, 그러나 과거에 대한 분쟁 때문에 미래 관계를 더 이상 포기할 수 없다”고 말했다.
¶4. (SBU) Following Lee's summit in Japan on April 21, Fukuda 
thanked the President for visiting Japan during his first 
overseas trip. "That shows President Lee's policy to 
prioritize his country's relations with Japan," Fukuda said. 
The two leaders agreed to restart "shuttle diplomacy" or 
reciprocal visits between the top leaders at least once a 
year. The agreement to hold these talks was suspended in 
2005 when then Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi paid a visit 
to Yasukuni Shrine which prompted then South Korean President 
Roh to cancel his visit to Japan in protest. Following the 
April summit, Fukuda said that he wanted to "open a new era 
in Japan-South Korea relations" while President Lee stated 
"historical truth must not be ignored but we can no longer 
afford to give up future relations due to disputes over the 
past." 

--------------------------------------------- 
MOFAT'S VIEWS ON THE SUMMIT AND GOING FORWARD 
--------------------------------------------- 
정상 회담과 관계 진전에 대한 외교부의 관점
외교부의 일본국장인 주중철은 이명박의 일본 접근법을 대립을 피하고, 대중들의 감정을 “진정시키는” 방식의 하나로 요약했다. 2월 취임한 이래, 주 국장은 외교부가 한국과 일본의 관계를 안정화하는 방안을 토론하기 시작했다고 말했다. 결론은 상호 관심사 가운데 덜 민감한 부분에서 일본과 협력하는 것이었다.(젊은이 교환 방문, 경제 협력, 에너지 협력 등과 같은) 그리고 민감한 문제는 피하는 것이다.(야스쿠니 신사 참배, 리앙쿠르 분쟁, 위안부 문제) 주국장은 과거에 일본과 문제는 일본의 정치인들은 말하자면 수상들이 한국인들을 분노하게 하면서 일본의 국내 지지를 얻기 위해 의도된 언행이 있을 때마다 떠올랐다고 말했다. 
¶5. (C) MOFAT's Director for the Japan Division, Joo 
Joon-chul, summarized Lee Myung-bak's approach toward Japan 
as one of avoiding confrontation and keeping public sentiment 
"subdued." After President Lee took office in February, 
Director Joo said that MOFAT began discussing ways to 
stabilize Korea's relationship with Japan. The conclusion 
was to work with Japan on less sensitive areas of mutual 

concern (youth exchanges, economic agreements, energy 
copperation) and avoid sensitive issues (Yasukuni Shrine 
visits, Liancourt Rocks territorial disputes, and Comfort 
Women). Joo said that problems with Japan arose in the past 
when Japanese politicians, namely the Prime Minister, would 
do or say something intended to garner support with domestic 
constituents while angering Koreans. 

주국장에 따르면, 일본은 “성급하게” FTA 회담의 재개가 4월 21일 정상회담에 이은 공동 언론 성명서에 담겨야 한다고 요청했다. 한국은 교착 상태인 회담의 재개 가능성을 토의하겠다는데 동의했으나 공식적인 재개를 약속하지 않았다. 주국장은 경제협력합의의 실효성을 대단하게 생각하지 않았다. 공동성명에 담긴 이 대목에 대해 야심에 찬 그 무엇을 추구하려는 의도가 없었다는 것이다.주는 한국의 회사들 특히 재벌들이 한국 시장을 일본 제조업체에 개방하는 걸 반대한다고 말했다. 그래서 FTA 회담은 빨리 진척되지 않을 것이다. 

¶6. (C) According to Joo, Japan "urgently" requested that a 
resumption of Free Trade Agreement talks be included in the 
joint press statement following the April 21 summit. Korea 
agreed to discuss the possibility of reopening the stalled 
talks but did not commit to an official restart. Joo 
downplayed the substance of the Economic Partnership 
Agreement that was also introduced in the statement saying 
they intentionally did not strive for anything too ambitious 
in this part of the statement. Joo said ROK companies, 
especially chaebols, were against opening Korea to 
manufacturing companies from Japan, so FTA talks would not 
move fast. 

주국장은 후쿠다가 다음 정상회담을 위해 9월에 서울에 올 것 같다고 말했다. 이에 대비해 외교부는 4월 성명서보다 좀 더 구체적인 공동 비전 성명서의 초안을 잡는 작업을 할 것이라고 말했다. 김대중 전대통령과 오부치 전 수상은 1998년 정상회담에 뒤어 공동 성명을 발표했다. 10년이 경과했으므로, 주는 1998년 성명을 되돌아 보고 지난 10년 동안 한국이 어떤 진전을 이뤘는지를 평가하기에 좋은 시점이라고 말했다. 비슷하게 9월 정상회담에서 나올 성명서는 향후 10년에 대한 한국과 일본의 비전을 구체화하는 일이 될 것이다. 

¶7. (C) Joo said that Fukuda was likely to come to Seoul in 
September for the next summit meeting. In preparation for 
that meeting, MOFAT would work to draft a more comprehensive 
joint vision statement than the April 2008 statement. Former 
President Kim Dae-jung and Prime Minister Obuchi issued a 
joint statement following their 1998 summit in Japan. Since 
ten years had passed, Joo said it was a good time to reflect 
on the 1998 statement and evaluate what progress Korea had 
made over the past decade. Similarly, the statement that 
will come out of the September 2008 summit would likely spell 
out the vision for Korea and Japan ten years into the future. 
-------------------------------------------- 
JAPANESE VIEW OF THE FUTURE AFTER THE SUMMIT 
-------------------------------------------- 
정상회담 이후 미래에 대한 일본의 시각
서울의 일본 대사관 정치 참사관은 일본 한국 정상회담에 대한 한국 외교부의 평가에 동의했다. 과거와 영토 문제에 대한 논의는 회피하고 경제 관계를 강화하는데 초점을 맞췄다는 것이다. 그는 양국 관계의 분위기가 긍정적으로 유지될 것이라고 예상하면 이명박이 노무현 대통령보다 “두꺼운 피부”를 가질 것 같다고 말했다. 불가피하게 마찰이 생길 때 사소한 트러블들을 견디게 하는 피부를 가졌다는 것이다. 노대통령은 세계에서 한국의 이미지를 지지하게 하는데 더 큰 관심을 가졌다. 그리고 노대통령은 일본이 한국에 맞설 때는 공개적으로 대응해야 한다고 느꼈다. 이슈가 발생했을 때, 양측은 갈등을 피하고 문제를 관리하기보다는 쟁점의 정치화를 피하기 위해 조심스러울 필요가 있었다. 이 정치 참사관은 일본과 한국은 한일 합동역사연구위원회를 통해 역사적인 문제들을 논의해나가려는 노력을 계속해야 한다고 말했다. 이 위원회는 올해 말에 그들이 발견한 것들을 발표할 예정이다. 이런 노력의 결과는 양쪽 그룹이 함께 만나서 서로의 말에 경청하는 것을 배우는 것보다 훨씬 덜 중요하다. 과정 자체가 바람직한 결과였다. 
¶8. (C) A political officer at the Japanese Embassy in Seoul 
shared MOFAT's assessment of the Japan-Korea summit as 
focused on strengthening economic bonds while avoiding 
discussion of historical and territorial issues. He said he 
expected the tone of relations to remain positive, noting 
that Lee Myung-bak was likely to have "thicker skin" than 
President Roh allowing him to weather minor troubles when 
they would inevitably arise. President Roh was more 
concerned about supporting Korea's image in the world and 
felt he had to respond publicly when Japan made an affront to 
Korea. When an issue arose, the two sides would need to be 
careful to avoid politicizing the issue but rather manage the 
issue and avoid conflict. The political officer said Japan 
and Korea continued their efforts to discuss historical 
issues through the Korea-Japan Joint History Research 
Committee that was expected to issue their findings later 
this year. The results of this effort were far less 
important than the fact that the two groups were meeting 
together and learning to listen to one another. The process 
was the desired result. 

--------------------------------- 
NORTHEAST ASIA HISTORY FOUNDATION 
--------------------------------- 
동북아시아 역사 재단

일본과 좀 더 가까운 관계를 바라는 이대통령의 포부에 걸림돌이 되는 것은 몇몇 역사문제에 초점을 맞추고 있는 싱크탱크 들이다. 한국정부가 후원하는 동북아시아 역사 재단은 2004년 설립됐다. 노무현 정부 때로 고구려 프로젝트의 형태로 발족됐다. 이 싱크탱크는 2004년 중국의 동북공정에 대한 직접적인 응수였다. 2006년 고구려 프로젝트는 리앙쿠르 암도(독), 위안부와 다른 논쟁적인 “역사” 문제들을 연구하는 학자들과 결합돼 현재의 재단으로 탄생됐다. 이 재단이 천명하는 임무는 동북아시아 지역에서 평화와 번영의 초석을 확립하는 것이다. 이 지역과 세계에서 많은 분노를 일으킨 역사 왜곡에 맞서, 장기적인 포괄 연구와 체계적이고 전략적인 정책 개발을 통해 역사에 대한 올바른 이해를 발전시켜 나가는 방식으로 이 같은 목표를 달성한다는 것이다.
¶9. (SBU) Standing in the way of President Lee's aspiration 
for closer ties to Japan are several historically focused 
think tanks. The ROKG-funded Northeast Asia History 
Foundation began in 2004, during Roh Moo-hyun's tenure, as 
the Goguryeo Project. The think tank was a direct response 
to the PRC's 2004 launching of the Northeast Project. In 
2006, the Goguryeo Project combined with scholars on the 
Liancourt Rocks (Dokdo), Comfort Women, and other 
controversial "historical" issues to form the current 
Foundation. The Foundation's stated mission is to "establish 
a basis for peace and prosperity in Northeast Asia by 
confronting distortions of history that have caused 
considerable anguish in this region and the world at large, 
and developing a correct understanding of history through 
comprehensive long-term research and systematic and strategic 
policy development." The Foundation is organized into six 
divisions, each focusing on a different issue. The think 
tank employs 80 professors to conduct its research. 

이 재단의 기획부문 소속인 홍명기 박사는 역사적으로 민감한 주제에 대해 한국인들을 “자극할” 때에 대비한 계획을 세우고 있다고 우리에게 말했다. 홍박사에 따르면, 일본과 관련한 역사적인 문제들은 현재와도 밀접한 관련이 있고, 그러므로 일본이 이들 문제를 다시 전면에 내세우는 것은 시간 문제라는 것이다. 한양대학의 윤휘택 교수는 재단의 전 연구원인데, 일본과 한국의 겉보기에 우호적인 관계에 대해 회적이라고 말했다. 과거를 돌아보면, 지난 두 번의 정부 즉 김대중과 노무현 정부는 출범 초기부터 양국 관계를 개선할 의지를 표명했다. 중국과 한국에 대해 갈수록 강경한 일본의 시각 때문에 후쿠다 총리는 셔틀 외교를 재개하는 현재의 노선을 계속할 수 없을 것이다. 결국에 가서는 어떤 형태로든 한국에 반대하는 일본 대중의 정서에 굴복하게 될 것이다. 

¶10. (SBU) Dr. Hong Myeon-ki from the Planning Division of the 
Foundation told us that his office is engaged in plans for 
when Japan will next "provoke" Korea on one of the sensitive 
historical issues. According to Hong, the historical issues 
with Japan have strong ties with current issues and therefore 
it is only a matter of time before Japan brings them to the 
forefront again. Professor Yoon Hwy-tak from Hanyang 
National University, and a former Foundation researcher, also 
expressed his skepticism about the apparent warming relations 
between Japan and Korea. Looking at the past two 
administrations in Korea, both Kim Dae-jung and Roh Moo-hyun 
expressed a desire at the outset of their tenure to improve 
relations with Japan, Yoon said. Because of Japan's 
increasingly hard-line view toward China and Korea, Prime 
Minister Fukuda would not be able to continue along the 
current path to restart shuttle diplomacy and will eventually 
give in to public sentiment opposing Korea in some fashion. 
---------------------- 
COMPARISONS TO GERMANY 
---------------------- 
일본과 비교

홍은 지역내에서 일본의 역할은 제한될 것이라고 언명했다. 과거 관심사들을 해결하기를 일본이 거부하기 때문이다. 전후 독일과 비교하면서 홍박사는 과거 잔학상을 해결하려는 독일의 의지는 해당 지역과 세계에서 오늘날 지도자 반열에 독일을 오르도록 했다고 말했다. 지금으로서 일본은 역사적 이슈들을 국내 정치 도구로 활용하는 걸 선호한다. 과거 문제의 해결을 시작하기 위해 일본에 무슨 충고를 하겠느냐는 물음에 그는 머뭇거렸다. 그러다가 동북아의 미래에 대해 일본이 무슨 생각을 하는지를 아무도 모른다고 말했다. 그들이 지역 평화와 안보에 관심이 있을까 혹은 국가 안보와 경제 발전에 관심이 있을까?

¶11. (SBU) Hong stated that Japan's role in the region will 
also be limited because of its refusal to address historical 
concerns. Drawing a comparison to post-war Germany, Hong 
said Germany's willingness to address its past atrocities 
allowed Germany to accede to its current level of leadership 
in the region and the world. For now, Japan preferred to use 
historical issues as a domestic political tool. When asked 
what he recommended Japan do to begin to address the past, 
Hong demurred but said that no one knows what Japan is 
thinking about the future of Northeast Asia. Are they 
interested in regional peace and security or only national 
security and economic growth? 

윤교수는 다른 유럽국가들과 독일의 화해는, 기독교 미음과 문화적 유사성을 공유하는 바탕에 의해서 촉진됐다고 지적했다; 오늘의 유럽연합 탄생을 지지한 것과 같은 원칙들이다. 다른 차이는 일본이2차 대전에서 아시아 국가에 의해 패배하지 않았다는 점이다;일본에 패배를 안 긴 것은 한국이나 중국이 아닌 미국이다. 유럽은 비슷한 생활수준을 가진 민주국가들의 공동체로 남아 있다. 그러나 아시아는 국민들의 생활의 질이나 이데올로기에서 차이가 아주 크다고 윤교수는 말했다. 일본의 강한 경제적 지위는 그들로 하여금 아시아에서는 배울 게 없다는 생각을 하게 만들고 있다.

¶12. (SBU) Yoon pointed out that Germany's reconciliation with the other European countries was facilitated by a foundation 
of shared Christian beliefs and cultural similarities; the 
same principles that supported the creation of the European 
Union today. Another difference is that Japan was not 
defeated by an Asian country in World War II; it was the U.S. 
that handed Japan its defeat, not the ROK or China. Europe 
remains a community of democracies with similar living 
standards but Asia still has large gaps in the quality of 
life of its people and vast differences in their ideology, 
Yoon said. Japan's strong economic position makes it think 
it has nothing to learn from Asia. 
-------------------------------- 
MORE ATTENTION ON REGIONAL PEACE 
-------------------------------- 
지역 평화에 대한 좀 더 많은 관심
홍박사는 지역 평화와 안보 문제에 대해 미국과 좀 더 많은 대화를 희망했다. 이 지역에서 항구적인 평화와 안보를 실질적으로 성취하기에 앞서 많은 작업들이 필요하다면 이같이 말했다. 많은 사람들이 이 지역의 평화는 북한이 비핵화한 뒤에야 올 것으로 생각하고 있음에도 불구하고, 미래에 대비하기 위해 이런 일이 일어나기를 기다려서만은 안된다는 것이다. 윤교수는 역사 이슈들을 돌아보고 그럼으로써 역사 문제를 다루는데 필수적인 모든 이해당사자들과 대화를 촉진하는 한국의 유일한 싱크탱크라고 덧붙였다. 역사 문제들은 지역의 평화 역학을 성공적으로 조직하는데 방해가 될 수 있는 것들이기 때문이다. 

¶13. (SBU) Hong expressed his hope to have more dialogue with 
the U.S. about regional peace and security issues noting that 
much work will be required well in advance of actually 
achieving lasting peace or security in the region. Even 
though everyone agreed that regional peace would only come 
after North Korea denuclearized, we should not wait for that 
event to occur to make plans for the future. Professor Yoon 
added that the Foundation was the only think tank in Korea 
that was looking at historical issues and therefore increased 
dialogue with all parties was essential to deal with 
historical issues that could inhibit successful organization 
of a regional peace mechanism. 
-------------------------- 
SUGGESTION FOR A U.S. ROLE 
-------------------------- 
미국 역할에 대한 제안
홍은 북한과 남한이 한국전쟁을 공식적으로 종료시키기 위해 언제 어떻게 평화협정을 맺어야 하는지에 관해서 중대한 역할을 할 수 있을 것 같다고 주장했다. 강력한 미국 한국, 미국 일본 동맹 관계에도 불구하고, 홍은 많은 아시아 사람들이 이 지역 내에서 미국의 존재 동기에 대해 의문을 품고 있다고 말했다. 미국은 단지 자신들만의 이익을 기대하는가, 혹은 지역의 안정도 함께 고려하는가에 대해 의문을 품고 있다는 것이다. 가능한 하나의 제안으로 홍은 미국이 중재자의 역할을 하고, 동북아시아의 전문가들로 하여금 역사적인 문제들을 좀 더 상세하게 논의할 수 있도록 노력해야 한다고 말했다. 지역의 학자들이 이미 아이디어들을 공유하고 있기는 하지만, 정부 수준에서 좀 더 많은 교류가 필요하다고 홍은 말했다. 미국은 이 지역의 역사적 사건들에 있어 당사자였고, 그래서 상황을 진전시킬 수 있는 역할을 하는 것은 수용될 수 있다. 
¶14. (SBU) Hong asserted that the U.S. was likely to play a 
significant role in how and when North and South Korea 
conclude a peace agreement to officially end the Korean War. 
Despite the strong U.S.-Korea and U.S.-Japan alliances, Hong 
said many people in Asia questioned the U.S. motives in the 
region and whether the U.S. was only looking out for its own 
interests or was concerned about regional stability as well. 
As one possible suggestion, Hong offered that the U.S. could 
play t role of intermediary and work to bring experts 
together from Northeast Asia to begin discussing historical 
issues in more detail. Although academics from the region 
were already sharing ideas, there needed to be more exchange 
at the government level, Hong said. The U.S. was a party to 
historical events in the region and therefore it would be 
acceptable for it to play a role going forward as well. 

----------------------------- 
JAPANESE COLLABORATORS LISTED 
----------------------------- 
친일 인사들 명단 
4월 29일 친일활동 조사위원회는 1910~45년 일본의 한국 식민 기간 동안 일본에 협조한 고위 친일인사들의 명단을 발표했다. 조사위는 서울에 본부를 둔 사설 싱크탱크이다. 조사위는 8월 말 공개될 3개의 인명 사전에 담길 4776명이 선정됐다고 말했다. 이 책은 2005년 3096명의 친일인사 명단을 담은 책의 개정판이 될 것이다. 조사위는 2001년 170명의 연구자들과 집필가 등으로 구성됐다. 개인 헌금을 바탕으로 조사위는 2004년 기금 모금을 시작한 뒤 10일만에 미화 50만 달러를 모았다고 밝혔다. 진보파 정치인과 학자, 시민단체들은 친일사전 출판에 대해 지지 성명을 발표했지만, 이대통령은 식민시대의 논쟁을 재개하는데 대해 유감을 나타냈다. 그는 국가 진실위원회의 존치 문제를 검토할 그의 의향을 다시 한번 확인했다. 진실위는 과거 잘못을 조사하고 밝히는 기관으로서 과거 정부가 이들 위원회의 멤버들을 임명했다고 말했다. 4월 29일 종교 지도자들과 모임에서 이명박은 “식민시대 일본과 협력에 따른 장단점은 균형 잡힌 시각으로 봐야만 한다고”고 말했다. 

¶15. (SBU) On April 29, the Institute for Research in 
Collaborationist Activities, a private Seoul-based think tank 
released a list of Korea's top collaborators with Japan 
during its colonial rule of Korea from 1910-1945. The 
Institute said that 4,776 people were selected to be featured 
in three biographical dictionaries to be released in late 
August. The books will be an updated version of a 2005 
listing of 3,096 collaborators. The publication committee 
was established in 2001 with 170 researchers and writers. 
Supported by private donations, the Institute said it raised 
USD 500,000 in 2004 after only ten days of fund raising. 
While liberal politicians, scholars and civic groups released 
statements of support for the publication, President Lee 
expressed regret at the renewal of the colonial era 
controversy. He also reconfirmed his intent to overhaul the 
nation's Truth Commission, established to investigate and 
reveal past wrongdoings noting that the previous 
administration had named the members of these committees.
In 
a meeting with religious leaders on the April 29, Lee said 
"the merits and demerits of collaboration with Japan's 
colonial government should be seen with a balanced view." 

------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
코멘트

이대통령은 일본에 접근하고 양국 관계를 진전시키고 구축하기 위해 신뢰를 만드는 노력을 하고 있는 것처럼 보인다. 한국의 경제 수준을 끌어올리겠다는 이명박의 공약은 일본을 포함한 외국 투자를 유치하는데 크게 의존한다. 이대통령이 몇몇 보수주의자들을 시크탱크에 박아 넣는데 성공할지라도 이 사람들이 그들의 싱크탱크가 일본과 그 과거에 대한 사고를 바꾸게 하기 까지는 시간이 걸릴 것이다. 만일 그런 일이 있다면 말이다. 그 때가지 이명박은 이들 그룹으로부터 반대에 부딪힐 것이다. 이들 그룹은 일본이 실수를 저지름으로써 그들이 다시 한번 그들의 존재를 정당화시킬 수 있기를 고대하고 있다. 한국과 일본 어느 쪽도 역사문제에 대해 진전을 이루지 못하고, 도발에 대해 그들의 국민들의 반응을 진정시키는데 능동적으로 역할을 하지 못할 것처럼 보이는 가운데 이명박 행정부 아래서 좀 더 조용하고 성숙한 관계에 대한 희망을 품을만한 이유는 있다. 일본과 좀 더 성숙한 관계를 확립할 수 있는 한국의 능력은 미래를 내다보고 과주에 안주하지 않으려는 이명박의 개인적 역량에 달려있다. 또 한국 국민들로 하여금 이 것이 그들의 이익에 부합한다는 점을 확신시켜 줄 수 있는 이 대통령의 역량에 좌우된다. 

¶16. (C) President Lee appears to be making a good-faith 
effort to reach out to Japan and look for common ground to 
move forward and build relations. Lee's campaign promise to 
improve Korea's economic status relies heavily on attracting 
foreign investment, including from Japan. Even if President 
Lee is successful in injecting some conservatives into the 
historically-focused think tanks, it would take some time 
before these groups change their thinking about Japan and the 
past, if ever. Until then, President Lee is likely to face 
opposition from these groups who are eagerly awaiting a 
misstep from Japan so that they can once again justify their 
existence. As it seems that neither side is expecting to 
make progress on historical issues and will actively work to 
subdue public responses to provocations, there is reason to 
be hopeful for a quieter, more mature relationship under 
President Lee's Administration. Korea's ability to establish 
a more mature relationship with Japan may boil down to 
President Lee's personal ability to look to the future and 
not dwell on the past and convince the Korean people that 
this is in their interest as well. 
VERSHBOW