^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL856  |  2008-04-28 07:57  |  비밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>MARR MNUC PARM PREL KS KN }}  |

====== 제 목: SPI-17 제 17차 한미 안보정책구상 회의 (1부) ======
비 밀 SEOUL 000856 
국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
행정명령 12958  비밀해제 04/28/2018 
태그: MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), MNUC(([Military Nuclear Applications])), PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN8(([Korea (North)]))
제목: SPI 17: 제 17차 한미 안보정책구상 회의
참조 전문: [[08seoul857|제17차 한미 안보정책구상 회의 (2부)]]
분류자: 정치 참사관 대사 대행 브라이언 멕피터스((A/POL Brian D. McFeeters))  근거 1.4 (b,d).
번역자: PoirotKr(번역 주: 트위터 사용자 이름)  --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/09/28 17:03//

===== 요점 =====

1. (비밀) 요약: 2008년 4월 8일 제17차 한미 안보정책구상회의가 서울에서 개최되었다. 미국 대표단은 국방부 동아시아 부차관보 데이비드 세드니가 수석대표를 맡았고 한국은 대표단은 국방부 국방정책실장 전제국이 이끌었다. 쌍방은 17차 회의가 이명박 정부 아래에서 열리는 첫 한미 안보정책구상회의인 만큼 남은 한미동맹 현안을 해소하는 가운데 전향적이고 더 전략 지향 한미동맹의 전기로 만들 기회라고 강조했다. 동 회의 성격은 다가올 한미 정상회담을 앞두고 국방 현안과 관련 긍정적인 추동력을 개척하는 일에 방점을 두고 한미동맹을 재차 갱신하고 확대하기 위한 상호 지원으로 특징 지울 수 있다. 쌍방은 다음 한미 정상회담 공동 성명에는 한미동맹 비전을 포함하기로 합의했다. 한미 안보정책구상 회의에서 다룬 대다수 주제와 관련 전시 작전통제권 이양 준비, 평화 유지 활동 계획, 과거 한국의 이라크 및 아프간 지원, 정전관리책임, 용산기지이전계획 및 연합토지관리계획, 대외 군사판매 지위 격상, 미8군 변혁계획, 우주정책 협력의 확대 필요성 등에서 대체로 만족스러운 진전이 있었다. 한미동맹을 둘러싼 대체적인 분위기 개선이 올해 9개 주한미군 시설에 대해 신속하고 순조로운 반환으로 이어지고 2007년 기지 반환 과정에 발생한 언론 지상의 악다구니 재현을 피하고 한미동맹에 피해가 없도록 하는 바람에도 여러 논의를 해보니 주한미군이 한국 환경 기준을 따를지와 관련 근본적인 차이가 여전하였다. 쌍방은 해당 쟁점을 추가로 논의하기 위해 소장급 대표로 하는 미군 지위에 관한 협정(주둔군 지위 협정) 산하 특별합동위원회를 소집하기로 합의했다.

2. (비밀) 제18차 한미 안보정책구상 회의는 6월 워싱턴 디시에서 열기로 잠정적인 계획이 잡혀있다.
===== 비공개 회의 =====

3. (비밀) 전체 회의에 앞서 75분간 비공개회의에서 세드니 부차관보는 이상희 국방장관이 게이츠 국방 장관을 만나려는 5월 워싱턴 방문 일정에 차질을 빚은 점에 대해 사과하였다. 그는 미 국방성 장관의 일정이 서로 겹치면서 회동을 잡기가 어려웠다고 설명했다. 세드니 부차관보는 미 국방 장관이 2008년 6월 주한미군 지휘관 이·취임식에 참석하기로 계획된 서울 방문 중에 이 장관과의 회동을 고대하고 있다고 강조했다. 전제국은 이 장관도 6월 함께할 회동을 역시 고대하고 있다고 답하면서 남북 간의 긴장이 고조되는 관계로 이 국방 장관이 당분간은 한국을 벗어날 수 없을 거라고 덧붙였다.

4. (비밀) 부차관보 세드니는 한국군이 사용할 글로벌 호크와 정보,감시 및 정찰 능력 취득 작업을 한국 정부가 갑작스레 중단한 점에 대해 미국의 심각한 우려를 표명하였다. 그는 워싱턴 제16차 한미 안보정책구상 워싱턴 회의에서 전 실장이 이 문제와 관련 강력한 프레젠테이션을 했고 그와 알렉스 아비주 동아시아태평양 차관보에게 글로벌 호크 시스템 한국 판매에 관한 미국 정부의 승인을 담보하도록 전력을 다해 달라고 전 실장이 요청했었음을 상기하였다. 세드니 차관보는 자신과 아비주 차관보는 국방부와 국무부에 이 문제를 시급한 현안으로 제기했는데 이제 새 한국 정부 입장 변화의 결과로 앞으로 우리가 신속한 대응을 하는 데 지대한 영향을 줄 것이라고 설명을 부연하였다. 전제국은 미국 정부의 노고에 대해 감사를 표하고 한국이 글로벌 호크 취득을 재고하기로 한 결정은 2010년 4월 전시 작전통제권 환수 약정과는 무관하다고 세드니 부차관보를 안심시켰다. 전제국은 예산과 군사 계획상의 이유로 한국 정부가 구매 절차를 확정하기에 앞서 내부 검토가 필요해졌다고 설명하였다. ”우리가 계획을 취소하는 것이 아니라 검토하는 중이다”고 전제국은 말했다. 세드니 차관보는 한국이 오늘 당장 결정을 내릴 준비가 안 됐다면 한국 정부가 적절한 시기에 글로벌 호크 시스템을 취득하고 싶다는 관심을 지속해서 알리기 위해서라도 한국 측이 안보정책구상 회의에서 글로벌 호크 사용 용도에 맞는 정보,감시 및 정찰 요건과 작전개념에 대해 미국 대표단에 브리핑하면 좋겠다고 대답하였다. (주석: 이번 회의가 끝난 뒤에 전제국은 자신의 보좌관들에게 당일 오후 안보정책구상 회의에서 정보,감시 및 정찰 요건과 작전개념 보고를 하라고 지시했다.)

5. (비밀) 주한미군 병력 감축을 28,500명 선에서 멈출지에 관한 문제로 돌아와 전제국은 감축을 중단하는 것이 좋은 생각이라는 그의 견해를 밝혔다. 그는 만일 이 문제가 이명박 대통령의 4월 워싱턴 방문 중에 제기되면 원칙적으로 합의할 수 있지만, 자세한 사항은 6월 한미 국방장관 회의에서(한미 연례안보협의회의) 해결하자고 말했다. 세드니 부차관보는 그의 설명을 환영하면서도 미국이 병력 감축을 중단한 이유가 올해 방위비 분담금 특별협정 협상 중에 사용할 협상 카드로 사용하길 원했기 때문이라는 한 국방부 소식통의 발언이 공개적으로 회자하는 걸 읽어보고 미국 측이 매우 실망했었다고 강조했다. 전제국은 만일 미군 병력이 28,500명 수준으로 유지되더라도 존속하는 미군의 군사력과 관련해 더 자세한 사항을 요청했다. 세드니 부차관보는 한미연합사령부가 병력 감축은 신중을 기할 군사 조치라고 권고했다면서 어느 국가가 감축을 요청했느냐는 문제는 중요한 것이 아니라고 부연했다.

6. (비밀) 그 뒤 회의의 대부분은 미2보병사단을 연합토지관리계획에 따라 확장 중인 평택 캠프 험프리스 부지에서 새로 건설 중인 시설로 이전하는 용도로 방위비 분담 특별협정을 통해 갹출한 분담금 중 한국 지원분을 사용하는 문제에 할애했다. 전제국은 미2보병사단 이전 비용의 50%를 한국 정부가 지급할 거라는 벨 육군 대장의 미 의회 발언에 식겁했다고 말하였다. 국방부 국제정책 차장 준장 김병기는 방위비 분담금이 연합토지관리계획에 사용될 수 있다는 내용이 2004년에 동 계획이 합의될 때 쌍방의 분명한 이해가 있었다고 설명하며 사실 그러한 합의는 애초 2001년 연합토지관리계획 초기 논의에서부터 그런 양해가 있었다고 우리를 방어하고 나섰다. 그러나 김병기 정책차장은 국회를 이해시키려면 실질적인 수치가 필요하다고 주장하며 주한미군은 미국의 기금과 미2보병사단 이전 비용으로 사용될 (한국의) 방위비 분담금 사이 정확한 혼합 비율을 주한미군이 제시하라는 외교부와 국방부의 합창에 합류하였다. ”우리 관료들은 정확한 사실관계 확인 없이는 정책을 펼 수가 없다”고 국방부 송봉현 국제정책관은 덧붙였다.

7. (비밀) 전제국은 이 기회를 이용해 주한미군의 비인적 주둔비용에 쓰일 한국 지원분에 대해 더 정확한 계산이 필요하다고 주장했다. 그는 비인적 주둔비용 전체 중 한국의 방위비 분담금은 단 41%를 커버한다는 지난주 주한미군 사령관 내정자의 증언을 문제 삼았다. 세드니 부차관보는 응대하길 방위비 분담금이 2004년 방위비 분담금 특별협정에 따라서 연합토지관리계획으로 사용할 수 있고, 사용할 거라는 미국의 입장을 거듭 표명하였다. 그는 또 해당 절차가 투명했으며 방위비 분담금 사용에 관한 정보도 제공했다는 점을 분명히 하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 방위비 분담금 기금 사용이 허용되는 사항인 노동, 군수(軍需), 건설 등에 책임감 있게 사용한 점은 아주 명확하다고 강조했다. 대사관 정무 직원은 이미 제공된 정보 이외에 세부적인 정보의 추가 제공은 현재 당면한 문제의 해결책이 아니라고 하면서 현 방위비 분담금을 미2보병사단을 지원하기 위한 현 시설에 사용할 것인지 아니면 미2보병사단을 지원하는 신축 시설물 비용으로 사용할지는 문제가 될 일이 아니라고 강조했다. 말의 요지는 방위비 분담금 특별협정 기금이 의도된 목적대로 사용되고 있다는 점이라고 그는 말했다. <wrap hi>세드니 부차관보는 한국이 (방위비 분담금) 지원분을 늘려서 비인적 주둔비용의 50%를 감당한다고 치더라도 대한민국 방위를 위해 미합중국이 감당하는 미군 병력 주둔 총비용의 단지 18%를 커버하는 셈이라고 말했다. ”그러니 작은 액수 중에서도 적은 부분을 갔고 지나치게 흥분해서 논쟁하지 맙시다”라고 결론지었다.</wrap><WRAP center round info 90%>//**비인적 주둔비용 50% 논란? 이미 70% 이상을 부담**//Q4. 미국은 한국이 주한미군 주둔 비용의 50%를 부담해야 한다고 주장하는데, 정당한 주장인가요? A. 미국의 주장처럼 한국이 주한미군의 주둔비용을 일부 부담한다고 해도 굳이 50%이상 해야 할 의무가 없습니다. 뿐만 아니라 미국의 주장과는 달리 한국은 이미 50%를 훨씬 상회하여(현재는 70%이상) 주한미군을 지원하고 있습니다. 자세한 내용은 [[http://urisociety.kr/?p=1141|【방위비분담금 바로알기 ④】 비인적 주둔비용 50% 논란]] //우리사회연구소//
</WRAP>
===== 공개 회의: 한국의 평화 유지 활동 =====

8. (비밀) 모두 발언, 그리고 현재와 장래의 이라크/아프간 작전에 관한 한국의 설명에 이어 전제국 실장은 전 세계 평화 유지 활동 임무에 대한 한국의 다짐에 대해 논의했다. 전제국은 계속되는 평화 유지 활동 임무의 일부로 이라크, 레바논, 쿠웨이트 등 현재 14개국에 한국 병력 1,078명이 파견되어 있다 언급했다. ”한국 새 정부는 한국의 평화 유지 활동 능력 강화와 파병 절차 간소화를 주안점으로 삼고 있다”고 전 실장이 말했다. 현재 한국 헌법은 모든 파병을 국회가 승인하도록 요구하며 때때로 적절한 조치를 지연하는 경우도 있다. 전제국은 관련 한국 정부의 계획은 전문성을 갖춘 병력 1,000명 규모의 상비 평화유지군을 창설하여 적절한 훈련을 제공함으로써 신속히 파견할 수 있도록 하는 것이라고 설명하였다. 새로운 평화 유지 활동 법안은 적용 범위를 정하고 승인 절차의 간소화가 필요하다고 전제국은 설명하였다. 현재 세 가지 형태의 평화 유지 활동 법안이 국회 외교통상통일위원회의 심사를 받고 있다. 국방부는 올여름 다음 국회 회기 중에 동 법안 도입을 추진할 예정이라고 전제국은 말했다. 한국 정부는 또 기존의 평화 유지 활동 관련 추가적 군사 훈련 협력을 확대하기 위해서 합동 참모 본부 휘하에 평화 유지 활동(PKO) 전국 훈련 센터를 설립할 계획이다.

9. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 최신 정보에 대해 한국 측에 감사를 표했다. 대사관 정무 직원 데이비드 울프는 한국 정부가 올해 방글라데시 GPOI 캡스톤연습에 참가하도록 한국 병력 38명을 보내기로 한 결정을 사례로 언급하며 전 세계에서 활동하는 한국의 평화 유지 활동(PKO) 노력에 대해 미국의 사의를 표하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 미국이 몽골리아에 설립한 PKO 훈련소를 지원해 달라고 몇 년 전에 한국에 제안했던 일을 언급하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 한국 정부가 PKO 훈련소를 업그레이드할 계획인 만큼 노력이 중복되지 않도록 하고 협력 확대를 위한 시너지 효과를 확인하기 위해서라도 한국이 해당 훈련소 운영을 고려하라고 제안했다.

===== 이라크와 아프가니스탄에서 안보 협력 =====

10. (비밀) 전제국은 한국이 올해 12월까지 이라크에서 한국군 병력을 철수할 계획이라고 언급했다. 그는 이라크 철수는 계획대로 이뤄질 것으로 생각한다고 말했다. 그러나 그는 해당 계획을 재검토할 수도 있다고 언급했다. 아프간에서 한국의 역할에 관련해서 한국이 다음과 같은 분야에서 지원을 확대할 수 있다고 세드니 부차관보는 언급했다: 아프간 경찰 훈련소 등지에서 아프간 경찰을 비롯해 아프간 보안군 교육훈련; 특히 카불과 같은 곳에서 직업 훈련 기회의 확대; 그리고 방산 물자 무상 원조 또는 아프가니스탄 보안군 장비 확충을 위한 신용 지원 등이다. 세드니 국방부 부차관보는 한국 정부가 조사단을 카불에 파견해 요구 사항을 직접 확인해볼 것을 제안했다.

===== 對중국 군사 관계 ====

11. (비밀) 세드니 국방부 부차관보는 부시 정부 임기 동안 對중국 군사 관계 현황을 브리핑했다. 그는 중국이 책임 있는 이해당사자로서 국제 체제 안으로 끌어 들리려는 미국의 대중국 관계 확대 목표를 강조하였다. 미중 군사 관계 2001년 이피쓰리 사건으로 바닥을 치고 나서 최근 게이츠 국방 장관의 방중을 비롯해 다수의 고위급 방문으로 확대되고 있다. 일 년에 두 차례 정기적인 국방 정책 조정 협력 회담이 있다. 시드니 차관보는 미국의 "하나의 중국 정책"과 중국의 "하나의 중국 정책"은 다르다는 점을 언급하며 당 회담에서 제기한 미국의 “하나의 중국 정책”을 강조하였다. 동 회담에서 중국이 대만 문제를 거론하면서 특히 미국의 對대만 무기수출에 우려를 표명했다. 그러나 대만과 중국 사이에 경제적 유대가 심화함에 따라서 해협을 종단하는 중미 양국 관계는 최근에 안정화되고 있다고 세드니 부차관보는 요약했다. 시드니 차관보는 결론으로 미중 군사 관계에서 네 가지 성공 사례를 다음과 같이 꼽았다: 1) 17년간의 협상 끝에 미국이 한국 전쟁 실종자를 파악하려는 노력에서 그 가치가 입증된 중국의 한국 전쟁 기록에 접근을 허용하기로 합의하였다; 2) 핵전략 및 정책을 논의하기로 합의; 3) 중국의 군사력에 관한 백서를 미국에 제공; 그리고 4) 미 국방성와 중국의 인민 해방군 사이 군사 핫라인 현재 가동. 미국의 對중국 노력은 계속되고 있지만, 중국이 2008년 하계 올림픽을 이유로 교류를 천천히 하자고 요청했다.

12. (비밀) 전재국 실장은 한국 정부가 특히 군사 동향을 비롯해 중국의 동향에 관심이 많다고 말했다. 중국의 역내 안보 및 대북 영향력을 참작할 때, 한중 관계에서 두 가지 주요한 관심사를 강조했다: 중국의 국방 예산의 투명성과 중국의 군사력 증강의 궁극적인 목적이다. 세드니 부차관보는 인민 해방군은 공세적이고 성공적인 군 현대화 계획을 보유했다는 점에 견해를 같이하면서 중국은 위성탄도미사일과 사이버 전쟁, 핵 프로그램에 초점을 맞추고 있다고 강조했다. 전제국은 한국이 1992년에 중국과 외교 관계를 수립한 이후 중국이 대북 영향력을 활용하여 북핵 문제 해결하는 등 한반도와 북동아시아의 평화와 안정을 위해 더 건설적인 역할을 하도록 중국을 장려하는 것이 국방부의 對중국 정책이라고 말했다. 미국과 마찬가지로 한국은 한중 교류를 확대하려는 노력에 초점을 맞추고 있다. 한국은 지난 3년 동안 연례 국방 장관급 회담을 개최했다. 한국은 탐색구조 연습을 시행했고 해군과 공군 핫라인을 설치하기로 합의했다고 국방부 동북아정책팀장인 대령 이남우는 말했다. 한국과 인민해방군은 총 일곱 차례의 정보 교류 회담을 하였다.

13. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 국방부의 브리핑에 대해 감사를 표하고 핫라인 설치는 미래 위험한 상황 전개 잠재성 때문인지 아니면 구체적인 문제 때문인지 물었다. 전제국은 핫라인은 특히 양국의 해군과 공군이 역내에서 운용되는 근접성을 고려할 때 오해 소지를 줄이기 위한 한 방편으로 설치됐다고 응답하였다. 그는 한국 해군이 연례 합동 탐색구조 연습을 제안했지만, 중국이 거절해 가장 최근 훈련 시행은 2년 전 일이라고 자세한 설명을 부연하였다. 현재의 계획은 합동 탐색구조 연습을 항만대기요청 방문과 연계하는 것이다. 세드니 부차관보는 중국이 한국 정부와의 교류에서 북한과의 관계에 관한 정보를 함께 나누는지 물었다. 김병기 차장은 중국의 대북 관계에 대해서는 아무런 세부적인 사항을 논의한 바 없다고 응답했다.

14. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 국방부가 전략적 기도와 관련 중국과 경험을 공유하는지 물었다. 전제국은 중국과의 관계는 초동 단계이고 중국이 세부적인 사항에 대해 논의를 꺼리는 까닭에 논의가 어렵다고 응답했다. 외교통상부의 북미 국장 대행 장호진은 한미 군사 관계와 미국의 對중국, 對일본 군사 관계 사이 차이가 있는지 물어보았다. 세드니 부차관보는 일본은 상호방위조약 체결 동맹국으로 미국은 매우 긴밀하고 포괄적이고 깊은 관계를 공유하고 있다고 설명하였다.

===== 북한의 미사일 위협 =====

15. (비밀) 한국 측은 북한의 미사일 위협에 대한 솔직한 평가를 제시했다. 전제국은 북한은 미사일 개발 프로그램을 정권의 생존을 담보하고 외화를 확충하기 위한 수단으로 여기기 때문에 북한의 미사일 위협은 계속 커질 수밖에는 없다고 지적하며 한미 정보 공유 확대를 요구하였다. 남동우 대령은 KN02, 스커드, 노동, 중거리 탄도유도탄 대포동 2 미사일에 초점을 맞춰 북한의 미사일 위협의 개요를 제시하였다(남한의 브리핑 슬라이드 사본은 미국 국방 정보국 채널을 통해 전송하였다.)그는 북한의 탄도 미사일이 역내 주변국에 점차 위협이 되고 있다고 언급했다.

16. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 미국과 한국의 진단이 매우 흡사하다고 말했다. 그는 북한 미사일의 지속적인 개발과 능력 확대로 북한이 시위한 바 있는 대량살상무기와 핵 능력이 결합하면서 북한이 주변국과 역내를 볼모로 잡을 수 있게 되었다고 강조하였다. 세드니 참사관은 정보 공유와 협력 확대를 위한 하나의 토대로 삼고자 다음 한미 안보정책구상회의 요구 사항과 관련 합참의 브리핑을 요청함에 더해 협력할 지역과 문제를 식별하기 위한 한미 미사일 합동 분석을 제안하였다. 그는 미국의 미사일방어청이 다음 안보정책구상회의에서 합동 분석 과정의 실행 개념을 브리핑할 용의가 있다고 언급했다.

17. 주한미군 합동참모-계획 통제형 소장 프랭크 펜터는 세드니 부차관보의 언급을 제창하고, 국방부의 브리핑에 감사함에 더해 한국과 미국의 미사일 위협 평가는 거의 일치한다고 덧붙였다: 북한의 이러한 미사일 위협은 주한미군에 아주 중요한 관계로 지난주에 있었던 주한 미군 사령관 내정자 준장 월터 샤프의 미 의회 인준 청문회 증언에서 강조했다. 전제국은 합동 위협 평가는 이로운 일이고, 다음 안보정책구상 회의에서 이 주제를 깊이 탐구해야 한다고 언급했다.

===== 한미일 삼자 안보 협력 =====

18. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 제39차 한·미 안보협의회의에서 국방장관 게이츠가 역내 안보를 증진하기 위한 한미일 삼자 협력을 증대할 것을 요청한 사실을 상기하면서 미국은 일본과 한국이 함께하는 한미일 삼자 안보 협력을 열렬히 환영한다고 말했다. 그는 일본 국방성에 있는 그의 동료도 비슷하게 열렬히 환영하고 있다고 덧붙였다. 세드니 부차관보는 태평양사령부의 합동참모-계획 통제형도 연례 3자 합동참모-계획 통제형 회담을 통해 한국과 일본이 동참하는 3자 절차에 이미 참여하고 있음에 더해 이번 여름 하와이 환태평양 합동 훈련 이후에 삼자 탐색구조 연습도 계획이 잡혀 있다고 언급했다. 그는 미국 측은 운영 단계의 협력 확대를 기대하지만, 삼국 국방부 간의 전략적 정책 토론을 재개하는 것도 중요하다고 강조했다. 세드니 부차관보는 미국은 전략적 정책 토론을 주재할 용의가 있으며 아마 일본도 마찬가지일 것이라고 말했다. 다만 한국이 기존의 절차상에 다음번 토론을 주재할 순서로 파악하고 있다. 세드니 부차관보는 당 제안 토론은 한국과 일본이 모두 미국과 공동의 가치를 함께하는 동맹 조약국이라는 공통의 이해관계에 토대 위에 이뤄질 거라고 강조했다. 전략적 정책 토론 과정이 다른 국가들을 대적하거나, 배격하자는 의미는 아니다.

19. (비밀) 전 실장은 안보 위협이 점점 복잡해지고 초 국가적으로 진화함에 따라 3자 협력의 확대 요구가 증가하고 있다는 점에 견해를 같이하였다. 그러나 너무 부각 되면 인지된 위협에 맞서기 위해 중국과 러시아의 협력 확대로 이어질 수 있다는 우려를 거듭 표명하였다. 전제국은 일본이 관심이 있는지 미국의 확인을 요청했으며, 세드니 부차관보는 내일 도쿄 방문에서 확인하기로 약속하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 한국 정부가 일본과 연락하는 일도 역시 중요하다고 강조했다. 전제국은 한국 측은 시도해보겠다고 하면서 논의 주제 또는 세부 사항이 논의되기에 앞서 부처 차원의 승인이 요구된다고 강조하되, 실무급 차원의 초기 공조 확대를 고대하고 있다고 말했다. 그는 미 국방성이 이 문제를 주도하라고 요청했다. 세드니 부차관보는 게이츠 국방장관이 삼자 안보 협력 재계를 전폭적으로 지지한다며 국방장관실 존 힐이 고위급 회동을 준비하는 준비를 조정하기 위해 5월 말께 서울을 방문할 예정이라고 강조했다.

===== 대외군사판매 지위 격상 =====

20. (비밀) 주한 미 합동 군사고문단장 대령 케빈 매든은 한국의 대외 군사판매 지위 격상을 위해 강도 높은 수준의 지원 약속을 국무부와 국방부 내부에서 확보했다고 강조했다. 매든 대령은 벨 대장이 3월 12일 미 의회 증언에서 대외 군사판매 지위를 격상하자는 주장을 강력히 제기했다고 설명했다. 그는 현재까지 해당 법안이 하원에서 공동 발의자 25명을 확보했고 상원에서는 4명을 확보했다고 했다. 메든 대령은 미 의회가 구체적인 사안인 대외 군사판매의 지위 격상 문제를 전반적인 한미 관계의 관점에서 고려한다고 언급하며 한국 정부가 한미 동맹 현안과 관련 긴밀히 협력할 것을 촉구하였다. 아울러 미 의원들을 포섭하기 위해 적극적으로 관여하라고 했다.

21. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 미국 의회에 긍정적 동향이 있다고 지적하였다. 그는 게이츠 국방장관이 한미 상호운영성을 개선하려는 방안의 일환으로 더 나아가 한미 동맹이 공고하다는 중요한 징표로 삼기 위해 대외 군사판매 지위 격상을 전적으로 지지한다고 언급하며 한국의 대외 군사판매 지위를 격상하기 위한 법안에 대해 국방부 내부 지지세가 강하다는 말을 재창하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 상호운영성을 개선하려는 지속적인 협력의 일환으로 한국이 상호운영성 요건에 대한 자국의 분석을 미국과 공유할 것을 한국 대표단에 장려하였다. 왜냐면 한미 양국이 전시 작전통제권 이양을 추진하고 있고, 더 나아가 다음 안보정책구상회의까지 내다봐야 하기 때문이다.

22. (비밀) 전제국은 대외 군사판매 지위 격상은 한미동맹에 많은 파급력이 있다고 말했다. 또한, 그는 한국이 미 의회의 지지를 확보하도록 전력을 다하겠다고 확언하였다. 전제국은 미국 국방장관과 국무장관의 지지에 대해 사의를 전하였다. 그는 그 지지에 힘입어 성공적인 결과를 달성할 것으로 [국방부망 배포] 판단하였다. 미 국무부 전 동아시아태평양/한국과 차관보 짐 헬러는 국무부 장관이 미 의회 핵심 지도자들에게 조만간에 대외 군사판매 지위 격상 지지를 촉구하는 서신을 보낼 예정이라고 언급했다.
===== 국제 우주협력 전략 =====

23. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 한국이 제16차 안보정책구상 회의에서 요구했던 국제우주협력 확대 요청에 대한 응답으로 한국의 참여할 수 있는 다수의 우주 수료과정이 있다고 언급했다. 세드니 부차관보는 수료 과목을 한국 국방부가 검토할 것을 촉구하면서, 추가정보를 확충하고 대외 군사판매 과정을 통해서 한국의 등록 일정을 잡도록 주한 미 합동 군사고문단과 협력하라고 했다. 그는 (미공군우주사령부) 산하 국가 안보 우주 연구원에서 장래 어느 시점에 한국이 참여할 수 있도록 하는 국제 학생 대상 과정을 고안하는 자체 수료과정을 검토하는 절차에 돌입했다고 언급했다. 잠재적 우주 협력 국가의 능력, 요구 사항, 열기, 지식수준, 계획안에 대한 분명한 이해가 새로운 우주방어 협력 관계에 초석이 될 거라고 세드니 부차관보는 설명했다. 세드니 부차관보는 한국과 미 국방성 우주 정책실 사이 토론을 촉진할 것을 제의함에 더해 한국 측이 준비 과정에서 고려할 미 국방성의 질의 목록을 제시하였다. 그는 미 국방성이 우주 협력 관련 서비스 단계의 양해각서를 고려하기에 앞서 미 국방성이 한국의 요구 사항과 목표를 우선 이해할 필요가 있다고 언급했다. 전제국은 한국 정부의 요구에 신속히 대응해준 점에 감사를 표함에 더해 추가적인 국제 우주 협력과 관련 미국의 지속적인 관심을 요청하였다.
===== 전시 작전통제권 이양 =====

24. (비밀) 전제국은 이명박 정부가 전시 작전통제권을 원활하게 이양하도록 결의를 다지고 있으며 작통권을 새 정부의 핵심 과제 중 하나로 상정했다고 미국 측을 안심시켰다. 최영범 합동 참모 본부 전시작전통제권 추진단장은 전시 작전통제권의 전략적 이양계획에 따른 실행 경과를 요약해 제시하였다. 최영범은 작통권 구현 과정이 계획대로 진행되고 있다고 언급하며 전략적 이양 계획 과제 19개 중 완료율은 25%~35% 사이라고 인용하였다. 특히 통합 기획 시스템 합의 각서와 한미동맹 유지 협조반의 역할과 기능을 명시한 공동 로드맵 고안뿐만 아니라 합동작전조정센터와 합동정보본부 등을 고안하기 위한 논의가 진행 중이라고 보고하였다. 펜터 소장은 이양 과정이 순조롭게 진행되고 있어 예정대로 2012년 4월까지 이양이 이루어진다는 한국 측 브리핑에 동의했다.

25. (비밀) 팬터 소장은 양측이 다가올 한미 정상회담에서 전시 작전통제권 이양에 대한 양국의 다짐을 논의하고 재확인하길 희망한다고 했다. 그는 (전시 작전통제권) 전략적 이양 계획이 계속됨에 따라 적절한 예산 책정과 자원 할당뿐만 아니라 수적으로 제한된 교육용 (군사) 연습을 최대로 활용하는 일이 여전히 가장 중요하다고 강조하였다. 팬터 소장은 미국이 전시 작전통제권 이양 이후 필요한 보완 전력을 제공하겠지만, 해당 조치는 한국군이 자체 능력을 확충하기 전까지 임시방편에 불과하다고 말했다. 한국은 반드시 이러한 요구 사항을 충족하도록 적절한 자원을 할당하고 예산을 마련해야 한다. 팬더 소장은 전시 작전통제권 이양은 추가적인 시스템 취득에 달린 것이 아니라며 미군 지도자들은 오늘 당장에다도 한국이 전시 작전통제권을 환수할 능력을 갖춘 것으로 평가한다고 했다. 그는 전략적 이양 계획에서 규명된 추가 능력은 이미 충분히 확보된 전투력에 대한 보강일 뿐이라는 점을 명확히 했다. 그는 합동전력본부가 핵심이라며 효과적인 훈련 능력을 획득하는 중요한 단계에 해당한다고 말을 이었다. 전제국은 국방부가 해당 현안에 대해 충분히 파악하고 있지만, 합동전력본부의 구조나 인사 문제가 일부 해결되지 않았다는 점을 시인하였다.

26. (비밀) 전제국은 전시 작전통제권 이양을 대비하는 2008년 키 리졸브/독수리 한미합동 연습에 대해 긍정적 평가를 제시하였다. 한국 합참이 참관한 올해 키 리졸브/독수리 연습은 합동과 통합, 동시 운영을 달성하기 위한 44개의 훈련 일정을 포함한다. 키 리졸브/독수리 연습 참여를 통해 한국 합동 참모 본부는 합동 연습 체제를 한국이 주도할 필요성을 확인함에 더해 한국군 합동지휘통제체계의 실행 가능성을 검증하였다. 앞으로 한국 합동 참모 본부는 두 차례 전역사령관 지휘소 연습 시리즈를 거치면서 합동 체계에서 한국 주도의 체계로 전환할 계획이다. 다가올 2008 을지포커스가디언 연습에서 한국 및 미국 전쟁수행 본부 각각의 개별 능력을 시험해 볼 예정이다.

27. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 필요한 기술을 습득하기 위해 알맞은 인재를 알맞은 자리에 등용해 알맞은 훈련에 참여토록 하는 일이 얼마나 중요한지 언급하며 한국 합동 참모 본부는 키 리졸브/독수리연습 참여를 통해 혜택을 본 듯하다고 말했다. 그는 한국 합동 참모 본부가 2012년 전시 작전통제권 환수를 앞두고 남은 네 차례 을지포커스가디언 연습 일정을 통해 획득할 수 있는 교훈을 최대로 활용할 것을 촉구하였다. 팬터 소장은 미국은 한반도 합동 방어 태세를 담보하기 위해 한반도 키 리졸브/독수리 연습과 을지포커스가디언 훈련에 대한 다짐은 변함이 없다고 강조하였다. 연습을 통한 훈련이 결정적이지만, 국가별 작전 계획 개발도 계속 중시할 것을 촉구함에 더해 한국이 특히 지휘,통제,통신,컴퓨터,정보시스템을 취득함에 따라 상호운용성에 대해 많은 관심을 쏟아야 할 필요가 있다고 강조하였다. 그는 상호운용성이 충분해 해결되지 않는다면 지휘 통제가 "와해"될 거라고 주의를 당부하였다.
===== 정전관리책임 =====

28. (비밀) 국방부 국제평화협력과장 대령 박희철은 유엔군사령부 정전관리책임 고위급 실무단은 네 가지 범주에 대해 포괄적인 양해를 얻었다고 설명하였다. 말하자면 1) 일반/감독; 2) 군사분계선과 비무장지대의 관리와 사법권; 3) 휴전협정 유지를 위한 정전 및 통제병력 유지의 구체적인 수단; 그리고 4) 군사 정전위원회 및 중립국 감독위원회 운영과 지원 등이다. 각각의 범주는 정전협정에서 확인된 구체적인 관련 책임을 포함할 것이다. 대령 박희철은 고위급 실무단은 범주 1과 3의 표제로 쓸 구체적인 문안뿐만 아니라 구체적인 책임 소재 논의도 추가될 것이라고 말했다. 그러나 박희철은 고위급 실무단이 세부적 책임과 추정 책임 소재와 그에 따른 책임에 요구되는 권한을 검토하고 식별하는 등 1단계 과제 완수에 접어들었다고 보고하며 제40차 한미 연례안보협의회의에서 그 결과를 보고하겠다고 했다. 전제국과 펜터 소장은 고위급 실무단이 이룬 성과를 칭송함에 더해 남아있는 이견은 사소하니 추가 논의를 통해 바로 해소될 것이라고 견해를 같이하였다. 소장 팬터는 유엔군사령부 정전 관리책임과 전시 작전통제권 이양 문제는 연계된 것이 아님을 강조하고 아울러 두 가지를 결부시키는 한국의 최근 언론 보도에 대해 분명한 선을 그었다. 팬터 소장은 지휘 권한과 유엔사령부 정전관리책임의 불일치는 오랫동안 문제였고 전시 작전통제권 이양 이후에도 더 악화할 거라고 언급했다.
버시바우
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL856.rtf>
S E C R E T SEOUL 000856 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/28/2018 
TAGS: MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], MNUC [Military Nuclear Applications], PARM [Arms Controls and Disarmament], PREL [External Political Relations], KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)] 
SUBJECT: SPI 17: U.S.-ROK 17TH SECURITY POLICY INITIATIVE 
TALKS PART 1 OF 2 
 
Classified By: A/POL Brian D. McFeeters, Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (S) The 17th Security Policy Initiative (SPI) talks were 
held in Seoul on April 8, 2008.  The U.S. Delegation was 
headed by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (DASD) for 
East Asia David Sedney, with Ministry of National Defense 
(MND) Deputy Minister of Defense for Policy Jeon Jei-guk 
leading the ROK Delegation.  Both sides highlighted SPI-17, 
the first SPI under the new Lee Myung-bak (LMB) 
Administration, as an opportunity to begin crafting a 
forward-looking, more strategic-oriented Alliance, while 
resolving remaining Alliance issues.  The talks were 
characterized by mutual support for reinvigorating and 
broadening the Alliance with an emphasis on initiating 
positive momentum on defense issues ahead of the upcoming 
Presidential Summit.  Both sides agreed that the next 
Presidential Summit joint statement should include a vision 
for the Alliance.  There was general satisfaction with 
progress made on the majority of SPI topics covered, 
including preparation for the transfer of wartime operational 
control (OPCON), ROK Peacekeeping Operations (PKO) plans, 
past ROK contributions in Iraq and Afghanistan, Armistice 
Maintenance Responsibility (AMR) transition, Yongsan 
Relocation Plan and the Land Partnership Plan (YRP/LPP), ROK 
Foreign Military Sales (FMS) Status upgrade, 8th Army 
Transformation plans, and the need for further cooperation in 
space policy.  Despite hopes that the improved general 
atmosphere surrounding the Alliance would lead to a quick and 
smooth return of nine USFK facilities this year, thus 
avoiding a replay of the acrimony in the press and damage to 
the Alliance that occurred during 2007's returns, discussions 
revealed that there remains a fundamental difference in 
perception of U.S. Forces in Korea (USFK)'s compliance with 
the relevant environmental standards.  Both sides agreed to 
convene a Special Joint Committee Session of the U.S.-ROK 
Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) with two-star general 
officer level representation to further discuss the issue. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SPI-18 is tentatively scheduled for June in 
Washington, DC. 
 
-------------- 
CLOSED SESSION 
-------------- 
 
¶3. (S) In the 75-minute Closed Session that preceded the 
plenary, DASD Sedney apologized for the difficulty they had 
encountered in scheduling Minister of National Defense Lee 
Sang-hee's May visit to Washington to meet with Secretary of 
Defense (SECDEF) Gates.  He explained the competing demands 
on the SECDEF's schedule made scheduling a meeting difficult. 
 DASD Sedney emphasized that the SECDEF looked forward to 
meeting with Minister Lee during his planned travel to Seoul 
for the USFK change of command ceremony in June 2008.  Jeon 
replied that Minister Lee also looked forward to their 
meeting in June, adding that due to heightened tensions in 
relations between North and South Korea, he would be unable 
to travel outside of the country anytime soon. 
 
¶4. (S) DASD Sedney expressed serious U.S. concerns over the 
sudden ROKG decision to suspend actions to obtain the Global 
Hawk intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) 
capability for the ROK military.  He reminded Jeon that at 
SPI-16 in Washington, Jeon had made a strong presentation on 
the issue and had asked that he and East Asia Pacific (EAP) 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Alex Arvizu do all they 
could to secure USG approval to sell the Global Hawk system 
to the ROK.  DASD Sedney further explained that he and DAS 
Arvizu had made this an urgent issue within both the Defense 
and State Departments and now as a result of the new ROK 
position that our ability to respond quickly in the future 
would be greatly affected.  Jeon thanked the U.S. Government 
for its efforts, and assured DASD Sedney that the ROK 
decision to reconsider acquiring Global Hawk was unrelated to 
its commitment to assume wartime OPCON in April 2012.  Jeon 
explained that budgetary and military planning reasons 
necessitated a ROKG internal review before the decision to 
proceed with the purchase was made.  "We are not canceling 
the plan, we are reviewing it," Jeon said.  DASD Sedney 
replied that even if the ROK was not ready to make the 
decision today, it would be better if it briefed the U.S. 
delegation at SPI on its Intelligence, Surveillance, and 
Reconnaissance (ISR) requirements and concept of operations 
(CONOPS) for the use of Global Hawk to demonstrate its 
continuing interest in acquiring the system at an appropriate 
time. (Note: After the meeting Jeon ordered his staff to 
deliver the ISR requirements and CONOPS brief at SPI later 
that afternoon.) 
 
¶5. (S) Turning to the issue of whether or not to halt the 
reduction of USFK troops in Korea at 28,500, Jeon expressed 
his view that it was a good idea to halt the drawdown.  He 
said that if it were raised during President Lee Myung-bak's 
April visit to Washington, it could be agreed to in 
principle, with the details to be worked out by the time of 
the U.S.-ROK defense ministerial in June.  DASD Sedney 
welcomed the news, stressing that the U.S. side had been very 
disappointed to read the public quote by an MND source 
stating that the U.S. had proposed to halt the drawdown 
because it wanted a bargaining chip to use during this year's 
Special Measures Agreement (SMA) negotiations.  Jeon 
requested more details regarding the capabilities that would 
remain in place if the troop level were kept at 28,500.  He 
added that it was not important which country had asked for 
it if the CFC recommended it as the prudent military thing to 
do. 
 
¶6. (S) Most of the meeting was then spent discussing the 
issue of using the ROK's contribution of burdensharing funds 
through the SMA to pay for the movement of the 2nd Infantry 
Division (2ID) to the new facilities now being constructed at 
the expanded Camp Humphreys site in Pyeongtaek under the LPP. 
 Jeon said he had been taken aback by General Bell's 
statement before the Congress that the ROKG would pay for 50 
percent of the 2ID move.  Brigadier General (BG) Kim 
Byung-ki, Deputy Director General of the MND International 
Policy Bureau, came to our defense by explaining that it had 
been clearly understood by both sides that SMA funds could be 
used for LPP when that agreement was concluded in 2004, in 
fact, that it was understood dating back to the initial 
discussions of LPP in 2001.  However, he joined the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MOFAT) and MND chorus calling 
for USFK to provide figures on the exact mix of U.S. funding 
and SMA money that would be used to fund the 2ID move, 
arguing that they needed hard numbers with which to make a 
convincing case to the National Assembly.  "We bureaucrats 
cannot do policy without having the facts," MND International 
Policy Bureau Director General (DG) Song Bong-heon added. 
 
¶7. (S) Jeon also used the occasion to argue that a more 
accurate calculation of the ROK's contribution to USFK's 
non-personnel stationing costs (NPSC) was needed.  He took 
issue with the USFK Commander-designate's testimony the 
previous week that the ROK SMA contribution covered only 41 
percent of that total cost.  In his response, DASD Sedney 
firmly reiterated the U.S. position that SMA can and would be 
used for LPP in accordance with the 2004 agreement.  He also 
made clear that the process was transparent and information 
had been provided on the use of SMA funds.  DASD Sedney 
emphasized that what is quite clear is that SMA funds are 
used responsibly for things that the SMA allowed: labor, 
logistics, and construction.  Embassy PolOff added that the 
addition of more level of detail to the information already 
provided is not the solution to the current problem and 
highlighted that whether the funds are used at current 
facilities to support 2ID soldiers or for construction of new 
facilities to support 2ID soldiers should not matter.  The 
point is that SMA funds are being used for the intended 
purpose, he said.  DASD Sedney stated that even if the ROK 
increased is contribution to cover 50 percent of the NPSC, it 
would only cover 18 percent of the total cost borne by the 
U.S. to station forces in defense of the Republic of Korea. 
"So don't get too excited arguing about small parts of small 
amounts," he concluded. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
OPEN SESSION: ROK PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS (PKO) PLANS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶8. (S) Following the opening remarks and ROK explanation of 
ongoing and future operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, Jeon 
discussed the ROKG commitment of PKO missions around the 
world. Jeon remarked that there were currently 1078 ROK 
troops deployed in 14 countries, including Iraq, Lebanon, and 
Kuwait, as part of ongoing PKO missions.  "The new ROK 
administration designated strengthening the ROK's PKO 
capabilities and streamlining their deployment process as a 
key priority," Jeon said.  At present, the ROK constitution 
requires the National Assembly to approve every deployment, 
sometimes delaying appropriate action.  Jeon explained the 
ROKG plan was to create and provide appropriate training for 
a standing PKO force of 1000 troops with all relevant 
specialties that could be quickly deployed.  New PKO 
legislation defining the scope of application and a 
streamlined approval process would be needed, Jeon explained. 
 Currently there were three versions of PKO legislation under 
consideration by the Foreign Affairs Committee of the 
National Assembly.  Jeon said that MND would push for 
introduction of the bill in the next National Assembly 
session this summer.  The ROKG also plans to establish a 
national PKO training center under the control of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff (JCS) in order to expand its PKO-related 
external military training cooperation. 
 
¶9. (S) DASD Sedney thanked the ROK side for the update. 
Embassy Poloff David Wolff expressed U.S. appreciation for 
Korea's PKO efforts around the world, citing the ROKG 
decision to send 38 Korean troops to participate in this 
year's Global Peace Operations Initiative Capstone Exercise 
in Bangladesh.  DASD Sedney noted that the U.S. had proposed 
a few years ago that the ROKG contribute to the 
U.S.-established PKO training center in Mongolia.  DASD 
Sedney suggested that the ROKG take into consideration the 
operations of this center to identify synergies for further 
cooperation and avoid duplication of effort as the ROKG plan 
for an upgraded PKO training center develops. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
SECURITY COOPERATION IN IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (S) Jeon commented that the ROK planned to withdraw its 
military troops from Iraq by December of this year.  He said 
he thought that the withdrawal would occur as planned. 
However, he noted that the plan could be reviewed.  Regarding 
the ROK role in Afghanistan, DASD Sedney stated that the ROK 
could contribute further in the following areas: training 
Afghan security forces, including the Afghan National Police, 
at locations such as the Afghan National Police Training 
Center; expanding vocational training opportunities in 
Afghanistan, especially in places like Kabul; and providing 
grant-aid defense articles or assistance credits to equip 
Afghan security forces.  DASD Sedney suggested that the ROKG 
dispatch a survey team to Kabul to see firsthand the 
requirements. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
MILITARY-TO-MILITARY RELATIONS WITH CHINA 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (S) DASD Sedney briefed the status of U.S. 
military-to-military relations with China during the Bush 
Administration.  He highlighted the U.S. objective of 
broadening engagement with China in order to bring it further 
into the international system as a responsible stakeholder. 
From a low point with the 2001 EP3 incident, U.S. mil-to-mil 
relations with China have grown to include a number of 
high-level visits, including a recent visit by Secretary 
Gates.  There are regularly-scheduled defense policy 
coordination talks twice a year.  DASD Sedney said that the 
U.S. emphasizes its "One China Policy" in these meetings, 
noting that the U.S. "One China Policy" differs from the 
Chinese "One China Policy."  At the meetings, China raised 
concern about Taiwan and specifically U.S. arms sales to 
Taiwan.  Overall, however, DASD Sedney surmised that cross 
straits relations had stabilized in recent years as cultural 
and economic ties between Taiwan and China had deepened. 
DASD Sedney concluded with four success stories from China 
mil-to-mil engagement: 1) The U.S. and China reached an 
 
agreement, after seventeen years of negotiation, to access 
China's records from the Korean War which would prove 
valuable in the U.S. effort to locate missing personnel from 
that war; 2) An agreement was reached to discuss nuclear 
strategy and policy; 3) China provided the U.S. its white 
papers on China's military power; and 4) The military hotline 
between DOD and the People's Liberation Army is now 
operational.  The U.S. engagement continues, but China asked 
to slow down exchanges because of the 2008 Summer Olympics. 
 
¶12. (S) Jeon said that the ROKG was very interested in 
China's development, particularly, its military development. 
Given China's direct influence on regional security and its 
ability to influence North Korea, Jeon highlighted two 
primary concerns vis-a-vis China: the transparency of its 
military budget and China's ultimate objective in its 
military force enhancements.  DASD Sedney agreed that the PRC 
had had an aggressive and successful military modernization 
program, highlighting the Chinese focus on anti-satellite, 
cyberwarfare, and nuclear programs.  Jeon said that since the 
ROK established diplomatic relations with China in 1992, 
MND's China engagement strategy was to encourage China to 
play a more constructive role toward peace and stability on 
the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia, including using 
its influence with North Korea to resolve the nuclear issue. 
Like the U.S., the ROK focused its efforts on increasing 
bilateral exchanges.  The ROK held annual defense ministerial 
talks for the past three years.  The ROK also conducted a 
combined search and rescue exercise and agreed to establish 
navy and air force hotlines, said Northeast Asia Policy 
Division Director Colonel (COL) Lee Nam-woo.  The ROK and PRC 
militaries also conducted a total of seven intel exchange 
meetings. 
 
¶13. (S) DASD Sedney thanked MND for their briefing and asked 
if the hotline was established because of a specific problem 
or potential for dangerous incidents in the future.  Jeon 
responded that the hotline was established as a way to 
mitigate misunderstandings, especially given the close 
proximity in which the air and naval forces of the two 
countries operate within the region.  He further elaborated 
that while the ROK Navy proposed an annual joint search and 
rescue exercise (SAREX) with China, China declined and the 
last formal exercise was conducted two years ago.  The 
current plan is hold joint SAREX training in conjunction with 
port call visits.  DASD Sedney asked if China shared any 
information about their relationship with North Korea during 
the ROKG exchanges with China.  BG Kim Byung-ki responded 
that no specific details were discussed concerning their 
relationship with North Korea. 
 
¶14. (S) DASD Sedney asked MND to share their experience with 
China regarding strategic intentions.  Jeon responded that 
the relationship is in elementary stages and difficult to 
discuss as China is reluctant to discuss many details. 
MOFAT's North American Affairs Bureau Deputy DG Chang Ho-jin 
asked if there were differences between the U.S. mil-to-mil 
relationships with China and with Japan.  DASD Sedney 
explained that there were many differences, noting that as a 
treaty ally, Japan and the U.S. shared a very close, broad, 
and deep relationship. 
 
-------------------------- 
NORTH KOREA MISSILE THREAT 
-------------------------- 
 
¶15. (S) The ROK side presented a frank assessment of the 
North Korean missile threat.  Jeon called for greater 
U.S.-ROK intelligence sharing, noting that the missile threat 
would continue to grow because North Korea saw its missile 
development program as a means of ensuring regime survival 
and acquiring foreign currency.  COL Nam Dong-wo presented an 
overview of the ROK's assessment of the North Korean missile 
threat focusing on the KN02, SCUD, No Dong, IRBM, and Taepo 
Dong 2 missiles (copies of ROK briefing slides have been 
transmitted through DIA channels).  He noted that North 
Korean ballistic missiles are increasingly becoming a threat 
to its neighbors in the region. 
 
¶16. (S) DASD Sedney noted that the U.S. and ROK assessments 
tracked closely.  He stressed that North Korea's growing 
capabilities and continued development of its missile 
program, combined with its demonstrated WMD and nuclear 
capability, enabled it to hold its neighbors and the region 
hostage.  As a basis for further cooperation and information 
sharing, DASD Sedney requested a JCS brief on its 
requirements at the next SPI and suggested a U.S-ROK missile 
joint analysis in order to identify problems and areas for 
cooperation.  He noted that the U.S. Missile Defense Agency 
would be willing to brief its concept for conducting a joint 
analysis process at the next SPI. 
 
¶17. (S) USFK J-5's Major General (MajGen) Frank Panter echoed 
DASD Sedney's remarks, thanked MND for the briefing and added 
that the ROK and U.S. missile threat assessments were very 
close; this threat had been very important to USFK as 
highlighted by USFK Commander-designate Lieutenant General 
Sharp's Congressional confirmation testimony the previous 
week.  Jeon agreed that a joint threat assessment would be 
beneficial, and noted that deeper exploration of the topic 
should be made at the next SPI. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
U.S.-ROK-JAPAN TRILATERAL SECURITY COOPERATION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶18. (S) Recalling Secretary Gates's call at the 39th Security 
Consultative Meeting (SCM) for increased trilateral 
cooperation to promote regional security, DASD Sedney said 
the U.S. would enthusiastically welcome resumed trilateral 
security cooperation with Japan and South Korea.  He added 
that his colleagues at the Japanese Ministry of Defense were 
similarly enthusiastic.  DASD Sedney noted that the PACOM J-5 
already engaged in a trilateral process with the ROK and 
Japan through the annual Trilateral J-5 Strategy Talks, as 
well as a trilateral search and rescue exercise planned 
following the RIMPEC Exercise in Hawaii this summer.  He 
noted that the U.S. side was looking to further 
operational-level cooperation, but stressed it was also 
important to resume strategic policy discussions among the 
three defense departments.  DASD Sedney said the U.S. would 
be willing to host, as would Japan probably, although he 
understood the ROK was the next in line to host discussions 
under the previous process.  DASD Sedney stressed that the 
proposed discussion would be based upon shared interests as 
both the ROK and Japan are U.S. treaty allies with common 
values.  The process was not intended to counter other 
nations, nor meant to be exclusive. 
 
¶19. (S) Jeon agreed that security threats had evolved, 
becoming even more complex and transnational, thereby 
increasing the need for greater trilateral cooperation.  He 
did, however, express continued concern that too much 
visibility might lead to greater Chinese and Russian 
cooperation to counter a perceived threat.  Jeon asked that 
the U.S. work to confirm Japanese interest, which DASD Sedney 
promised to do the following day when he visited Tokyo.  DASD 
Sedney emphasized the importance of the ROKG contacting Japan 
as well.  Jeon said he would try and stressed that 
minister-level approval would be needed on the ROK-side 
before topics or specifics were discussed, but looked forward 
to further initial coordination at the working-level.  He 
asked DOD to take the lead on this matter.  DASD Sedney 
emphasized that Secretary Gates fully supported resuming 
trilateral security cooperation and noted that OSD's John 
Hill would visit Seoul in late May to coordinate 
working-level discussions in preparation for higher-level 
meetings. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
FOREIGN MILITARY SALES (FMS) STATUS UPGRADE 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (S) Joint U.S. Military Affairs Group-Korea (JUSMAG-K) 
Chief COL Kevin Madden stressed that the U.S. side had 
secured strong, high-level support within the Departments of 
State and Defense for ROK FMS Status Upgrade.  COL Madden 
explained that General Bell had made a strong case for the 
upgrade in his March 12 Congressional testimony.  He noted 
that, to date, the legislation had received 25 co-sponsors in 
the House of Representatives and four in the Senate.  Noting 
that Congress viewed specific issues such as the FMS Status 
Upgrade from the perspective of overall U.S.-ROK relations, 
COL Madden urged the ROKG to cooperate closely on a range of 
Alliance issues, as well as to continue actively engaging 
U.S. legislators. 
 
¶21. (S) DASD Sedney pointed out that there had been positive 
movement in the U.S. Congress.  He echoed statements of 
strong support within DOD for legislation to upgrade the 
ROK's FMS Status, noting that Secretary Gates fully supported 
the upgrade as an important symbol of strengthening the 
Alliance and as a way to improve U.S.-ROK interoperability. 
As part of continued cooperation to improve interoperability, 
DASD Sedney encouraged the ROK to share with the U.S. their 
analysis of interoperability requirements as we move toward 
OPCON transition and beyond at the next SPI. 
 
¶22. (S) Jeon remarked that the FMS upgrade would have many 
implications for the Alliance and offered his assurances that 
the ROK would do everything possible to gain U.S. 
Congressional support.  Jeon conveyed appreciation for the 
Secretary's and SECDEF's support, which he believed would 
 
SIPDIS 
help achieve a successful result.  EAP/Korea's Jim Heller 
noted that the Secretary would send letters to key 
Congressional leaders in the coming days supporting the 
upgrade. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
INTERNATIONAL SPACE COOPERATION STRATEGY 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶23. (S) In response to the ROK request for greater 
international space cooperation at SPI-16, DASD Sedney noted 
that there were a number of space courses available for ROK 
participation.  DASD Sedney urged MND to review course topics 
and work with JUSMAG-K to obtain additional information and 
arrange ROK enrollment through the FMS process.  He noted 
that the National Security Space Institute was in the process 
of reviewing its curriculum to devise a course for 
international students that may be available for ROK 
involvement at some future point.  DASD Sedney stated that 
the foundation of a new defense space cooperation 
relationship was the clear understanding of the requirements, 
desires, knowledge level, plans, and capabilities of a 
potential space partner.  DASD Sedney offered to facilitate 
discussions between the ROK and the DOD Office of Space 
Policy and provided a list of DOD questions for the ROK side 
to consider in preparation.  He noted that before DOD could 
begin consideration of a service-to-service-level MOU 
regarding space cooperation, DOD would need to first 
understand ROK requirements and objectives.  Jeon thanked 
DASD Sedney for the quick response to the ROK's request and 
asked for continued interest by the U.S. in further 
international space cooperation. 
 
------------------------ 
WARTIME OPCON TRANSITION 
------------------------ 
 
¶24. (S) Jeon assured the U.S. side that the Lee Myung-bak 
Administration was committed to the smooth implementation of 
wartime OPCON and had designated it as one of the new 
government's core tasks.  JCS Chief of the OPCON Transition 
Unit COL Choi Young-bum outlined the progress made in 
implementation of the OPCON Strategic Transition Plan (STP). 
Of the 19 STP tasks identified, Choi quoted a completion rate 
between 25 to 35 percent, noting that the implementation 
process was on schedule.  Specifically, he reported that 
discussions were ongoing to draft the Integrated Planning 
System Memorandum of Agreement, a joint roadmap specifying 
Alliance Maintenance Coordination Cell roles and functions, 
as well as standard operating procedures for the Joint 
Operations Coordination Center and Warning and Intelligence 
Operations Center.  MajGen Panter concurred with the ROK 
briefing that the process was on track to achieve transition 
by April 2012 as scheduled. 
 
¶25. (S) MajGen Panter expressed hope that both sides would 
discuss and reconfirm their commitment to OPCON transition at 
the upcoming Presidential Summit.  He stressed that 
appropriate budget and resource allocation as well as fully 
utilizing the limited number of exercises for training 
purposes remained of key importance as STP implementation 
continued.  MajGen Panter said that while the U.S. would 
provide needed bridging capabilities after OPCON transition, 
this would only be a temporary solution until the ROK 
military obtained their own capabilities.  The ROK must 
budget and allocate resources as appropriate to meet these 
requirements, he added.  MajGen Panter said that the 
transition of wartime OPCON was not dependent on acquisition 
of additional systems, and that U.S. military leaders 
assessed the ROK is capable of assuming OPCON today.  He 
clarified that those additional capabilities identified in 
the STP would only enhance already sufficient warfighting 
capabilities.  He went on to add that the Joint Force 
Headquarters (JFHQ) was key and represented an important step 
toward achieving effective training capabilities.  Jeon 
stated that MND was fully aware of the issues, but admitted 
there were some unresolved problems with personnel and the 
structure of the JFHQ. 
 
¶26. (S) Jeon offered a positive assessment of the Key 
Resolve/Foal Eagle (KR/FE) 08 combined U.S.-ROK exercise in 
preparation for wartime OPCON transition.  This year's KR/FE 
exercise was observed by ROK JCS and included 44 training 
events to achieve jointness, integration, and 
synchronization.  Through KR/FE participation, ROK JCS 
identified the need for a ROK-led joint exercise system and 
verified the feasibility of a Korea Joint Command and Control 
System (KJCCS) oriented interface system.  Looking ahead, ROK 
JCS plans to move from a combined to ROK-led over a series of 
two theater-level command post exercises annually.  The 
upcoming Ulchi Focus Guardian (UFG) 08 exercise will test the 
capabilities of separate ROK and U.S. warfighting 
headquarters. 
 
¶27. (S) DASD Sedney remarked that the ROK JCS appeared to 
have benefited from participation in KR/FE, noting how 
important it was to have the right people in the right job 
participate in the right training in order to gain needed 
skills.  He urged ROK JCS to take full advantage of the 
remaining four UFG exercise events before assuming wartime 
OPCON in 2012 in order to benefit from lessons learned along 
the way.  MajGen Panter stressed that the U.S. remained 
committed to KR/FE and UFG to ensure preparedness for a joint 
defense of the Korean Peninsula.  While training through 
exercises is critical, he also urged continued emphasis on 
developing separate national operational plans and stressed 
the need to pay close attention to interoperability, 
particularly as the ROK acquired C4I capabilities.  He 
cautioned that C2 would "fall apart" if interoperability was 
not sufficiently addressed. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
ARMISTICE MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶28. (S) MND Director of International Peace Cooperation 
Division COL Park Hee-chol explained that the United Nations 
Command (UNC) Armistice Maintenance Responsibility (AMR) 
Senior Working Group (SWG) had achieved broad understanding 
on four categories, namely 1) General/oversight; 2) 
Jurisdiction and Administration of Military Demarcation Line 
(MDL)/Demilitarized Zone (DMZ); 3) Specific Means to Maintain 
the Armistice/Control Forces in order to Maintain the 
Armistice; and 4) Operate and Support the Military Armistice 
Commission (MAC)/Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission 
(NNSC).  Each category would include the relevant specific 
responsibilities identified in the Armistice Agreement.  Park 
said that the SWG would further discuss the specific language 
in the title for categories 1 and 3, as well as the placement 
of some specific responsibilities.  However, Park reported 
that the SWG was on track to complete phase one tasks, 
including the identification of specific and implied 
responsibilities along with a review of requisite authorities 
associated with each responsibility, and would report the 
results to the 40th SCM later this year.  Jeon and MajGen 
Panter both praised the progress made by the SWG and agreed 
that the remaining differences were minor and would be 
resolved promptly through further discussion.  MajGen Panter 
stressed that UNC AMR and OPCON transition issues were not 
connected, clarifying recent ROK press reports that tied the 
two together.  MajGen Panter noted that the mismatch of 
authority and UNC AMR has long been a problem that will only 
worsen after wartime OPCON transition. 
VERSHBOW
</file>