^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL1243  |  2008-06-23 08:01  |  기밀  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PARM MASS2, PREL AF KS }}  |

====== 제 목: 한국정부 아프간재건 지원을 검토 =====

기 밀 SEOUL 001243 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방장관실((번역 주: Office of Secretary of Defense [OSD])) 국방부 부차관((번역 주: Assistant Secretary of Defense [ASD]))제임스 쉰에게 

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 06/23/2018 
태그: PARM (([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), MASS (([Military Assistance and Sales])), PREL (([External Political Relations])), AF (([Afghanistan])), KS(([Korea (South)])) 
제 목: 한국정부 아프간재건 지원을 검토 
참조: [[08seoul1204|가. SEOUL 1204]]  [[08seoul1174| 나. SEOUL 1174]] [[08SEOUL1153| 다. SEOUL 1153]] [[08seoul1145| 라. SEOUL 1145]]     
분류자: 정치 공사 참사관 조셉 윤 ((POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun.))  근거 1.4 (b,d).
번역자: PoirotKr (번역 주: 트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/10/12 12:01//

===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요점: 미국, 아프간, 그리고 여타 국가로부터의 수차례 지원 요청, 아프간에서의 한국의 이해관계에 반하는 탈레반의 거듭되는 위협, 그리고 최근 쇠고기 시위에서 불거진 정치적 민감성에 대한 우려 등을 마주하고 있는 한국정부는 전반적인 아프간 재건지원에 대한 내부 검토작업을 착수하였다. 그 결과 6월 중순에 잡힌 한국 경찰훈련원 소속 현지조사팀의 카불 파견은 해당 내부 검토작업이 완료되기 전까지 연기되었다. 한국정부는 추가 지원을 제공하기로 약속하기 전에 경찰훈련원, 군사훈련, 그리고 장비, 바그람에 의료 및 직업훈련팀 확대, 그리고 경제 발전과 선거지원을 포함하는 미해결의 수많은 추가 지원 요청을 심의할 계획이다. 한국정부는 최근 파리 아프간 원조공여국회의에서((번역 주: 2008년 6월 10일 )) 약속한 미화 3천만 달러 무상원조를 집행하고, 바그람 공군기지의 한국 민간의료팀은 예고된 6월 30일에 새 진료소를 개원할 예정이다. 추가적인 지원을 하도록 한국정부를 장려하는 일은 중장기적으로 더욱 어려워질 공상이 크다. //요점 끝.//

===== 많은 요청과 많은 위험성 =====

2. (기밀) 지난 6주 동안 연이은 촛불집회를 목도하면서, 한국국민은 이명박 대통령에 대한 불만과 정부의 미국 쇠고기 수입 재개 결정에 대한 불만을 지속적으로 표출해왔다. (참조 전문을((번역 주: reference telegrams)) 보라). 한국정부는 시위자들이 지금까지는 애써 피하던 반미주의를 발생 초기부터 자극하지 않도록 문제가 될만한 모든 한미동맹 현안을 뒤로 미뤄놓는 신중한 조처를 함에 따라서 전반적인 한미동맹 현안이 정치적 마비상태로 말미암아 희생양이 되고 있다. 아프간에서 한국이 지속적으로 역할을 하겠는가에 대한 질문도 비슷한 운명을 겪게 될 것으로 보인다.

3. (기밀) 한국의 더 많은 국제적 역할에 대한 한국민 사이 기대와 진실한 바람에도 이라크와 아프간에 참가하는 한국의 국제적인 노력은 한미 동맹이란 랜즈를 통해 이해된다는 게 압도적이다. 김현두 외교통상부 안보협력과((번역 주: ROK-U.S. Security Cooperation Division)) 과장은 선택 사항과 득실에 대한 전면적인 검토가 완료되기 전까지는 한국정부의 추가적인 아프간 지원 관련된 모든 결정은 보류되었다고 6월 19일 대사관 정무 직원에게 말하였다. 이번 검토의 일환으로 김 과장은 한국정부가 한국 경찰훈련원 파견의 일환으로 6월 중순 계획했던 카불 현지 조사팀 파견은 무기한 연기되었다고 대사관 정무 직원에게 알렸다. 김현두는 종합적인 검토작업이 필요한 이유 두 가지를 설명하였다. 첫째, 한국정부는 전번 요청까지 지난 몇 달간 서로 다른 형태의 지원 요청에 관한 14차례 비공식 문서를 수령했다. 김현두가 매우 신중하게 반복적으로 설명한 두 번째 이유는 현재의 정치적인 환경으로 추가적인 아프간 지원 약속을 현시점에 결정하기에 무리가 있다. 김현두는 한국정부의 검토 시간표는 분명하지 않지만, 이명박 정부가 현재의 위기를 극복하기 전까지는 결정이 나올 가능성이 크지 않다고 말하였다.

4. (기밀) 쇠고기 시위에 기인한 정치적인 민감성은 시간이 지남에 따라 잦아들 공산이 크지만, 한국정부는 아프간 현지 한국인의 안전과 보안, 그리고 이해관계가 아프간 재건을 지원하는 결정에서 일 순위로 꼽는 요인이라고 계속 강조하였다. 한국정부 대화 상대역은 작년 아프간 피랍 사태로 어떤 지원책에 한국민이 지지를 보낼 것인지도 상당한 제한이 있다고 지적하였다. (주석: 2007년 8월 탈레반 테러리스트는 아프간에서 한국 구호인력 23명을 피랍하고 억류하였으며, 한국인 억류자 중 2명을 살해하였다. 피랍 상황은 한국 언론에서 광범위하게 다루었고 한국정부의 부실한 석방 협상과 관련 상당히 부정적인 국민적 반응을 자아냈다.((번역 주: 아마 선글라스 낀 국정원 요원의 등장을 비난하는 조중동 식 코미디 극장을 말하는 것 같다. ))주석 끝.)

5. (기밀) 본격적인 쇠고기 시위가 있기 바로 직전인 5월에 연합뉴스의 한 기자를 직접 연락한 탈레반 대변인은 만일 한국정부가 경찰과 군대, 또는 선교사를 다시 보낸다면, 한국인 개개인, 외교관, 시설물, 그리고 아프간 전역 사업 관계자 등이 다음 목표가 될 것이라고 공언하는 연합뉴스 보도가 나가면서 아프간 관련 한국의 민감성은 다시 부각되었다. 외교통상부의 김현두 과장에 의하면, 지난달 언론의 경고성 보도가 나간 이후에, 만일 한국이 부대와 경찰을 파견했다는 이유로 아프간에서 다시 피랍 사태가 발생하면, 반미주의와 반동맹주의 감정을 응집시킬 수 있다. 그 이상의 경우, 이명박 정부가 다시 한 번 시위로 몸살을 앓을 수 있다. 한국정부는 아프간 지원이 한국과 미국 또는 한미동맹에 부담되는 것을 원하지 않는다고 그는 말했다.

===== 한국이 실천할 공약은 =====

6. (기밀) 한국의 추가 지원을 검토하는 가운데, 한국정부는 지금 진행 중인 사업을 계획된 시간표대로 계속 실천할 예정이며 해당 사항은: 
  * 의료 및 직업훈련팀: 엄청난 성공을 거둔 2007년 11월 군사 의료지원 파견단의 활동을 마치고, 한국정부는 바그람 공군기지에 새 진료소를 1월에 개설하기 위해 한국국제협력단이((번역 주: KOICA [Korea International Cooperation Agency])) 이끄는 민간의료팀을 파견하였다. 6월경 민간인 의사와 간호사 그리고 의무 행정직원으로 구성된 팀은 대략 25명과 새로 두 개 층에 걸쳐 150명의 환자를 수용할 수 있는 새 진료소로 확장해서 6월 30일에 개원할 예정이다. 원래 계획은 2008년 말까지 의료팀과 같은 장소에서 직업훈련 프로그램을 개설할 예정인 몇몇 한국경찰과 계약직 한국국제협력단을 비롯해 추가로 5~6명 내외를 파견할 계획이었다. (주석: 한국정부는 이러한 의료 및 직업훈련팀을 //“한국 지방재건팀”//이라고 부른다.)((번역 주: 여타 국가의 지방재건팀과 구분하기 위해 한국은 //“지방원조팀”//이라는 용어를 사용한다. Provincial  Reconstruction Team ⇒ Provincial Assistance Team 지망원조팀))

  * 미화 3천만 달러 무상원조: 한국정부는 6월 파리 아프간 원조공여국 회의에서 향후 3년에 걸쳐 거의 동일한 분할로 미화 3천만 달러를((번역 주: 1달러에 1100원으로 환산하면 330억 원 정도)) 추가 제공하기로 공약하였다. 지출이 시작될 날짜는 결정되지 않았다.

===== 다른 선택사항은 고려 중 =====

7. (기밀) 김현두는 추가적인 아프간 지원을 검토하기 위한 중단 상태는 한국의 아프간 재건 약속이 줄어들 거라는 신호는 아니라고 재차 강조하였다. 오히려 한국정부는 이번 기회를 수많은 가능성에 대한 전면적이고 신중한 검토의 기회로 삼길 원한다. 그 내용은:

  * 의료 및 직업훈련팀의 확대: 김 과장은 한국정부가 바그람에 의료 및 직업훈련 인원과 범위의 확대를 지금도 크게 선호하고 있다고 말하였다. 한국정부 관리들은 이 옵션을 //“확대된 지방재건팀”//이라고 계속해서 부르고 있지만, 보안 제공할 부대 파병을 포함한 확대는 아님을 시사하였다. 이용준 외교부 차관보는 //”한국 지방재건팀”// 확대를 위해서 미국이 보안을 제공해 주라는 6월 18일 쉰 부차관에게((번역 주: Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Security Affairs [ASD] Shinn > 미 국방부 아시아 태평양 담당 부차관 제임스 쉰 을 말한다. 한국언론에선 //“제임스 신”//이라고도 철자표기 함)) 한 요청을 재차 말하였다.

  * 선거 지원: 김현두 과장은 이달 초에 파리 아프간 원조공여국 회의에서 한국정부 대표단이 내년 아프간 전국 선거를 위해 특정되지 않은 //”선거 원조”// 제공해줄 것을 미국과 아프간으로부터 요청받았다고 말하였다. 김현두는 선거 지원의 내용을 결정하기 위해서 한국정부가 워싱턴 주재 한국대사관과 카불 주재 한국대사관을 통해 추가적 정보를 요청하고 있다고 설명하였다. 그러나 한국정부는 아프간 선거를 위한 일종의 재정적 지원 혹은 민간 지원을 호의적으로 고려할 수 있다는 뜻을 나타냈다.

  * 경찰훈련 및 장비: 게이츠 국방장관을 비롯한 미국 고위급 요청에 대한 응답으로, 한국정부는 아프간 경찰을 돕기 위해 20명의 경찰훈련 요원을 한국이 파견할 수 있을지 결정하기 위해 현지 조사팀을 카불에 파견하기로 계획을 세웠다, 원래는 6월 중순에 잡혀 있었지만, 아프간 지원사업에 대한 전반적인 검토가 끝나지 않아 현지 조사팀 파견이 무기한 연기되었다.

  * 아프간 국군 훈련과 장비: 김현두는 아프간 국군 소속 부대에 훈련을 제공하고, 아프간 국군과 법집행 관들에게 준군사장비를 제공해 달라는 다양한 요청을 수 차례 받았다고 말하였지만,해당 요청의 세부 사항이 불분명하다고 하였다.

  * 공항 재건축 사업: 파리 아프간 원조공여국 회의에서 오준 외교통상부 다자외교조약 실장은 예고된 차가차란 공항을((번역 주: Chaghcharan airport)) 재 건축에 대한 한국의 잠재적 지원과 관련해 리투아니아 대표단과 협의를 하였다.

  * 경제 개발 지원: 김현두는 한국이 광범위한 전후 경험과 경제적인 성공에 기초해 일종의 //“경제 개발”// 지원을 제공하자는 6월 18일 회의에서 나온 쉰 차관의 제안에 대해 이용준 실장이 관심이 있다고 전하였다. 만일 안보 관련해 한국의 우려가 완화된다면, 그 제안이 유망한 선택 사항이 될 수도 있다고 이 실장은 말하였다.

===== 논평 =====
8. (기밀) 아프간 재건과 안정을 위한 한국의 지원을 확대하자고 한국정부에 장려하는 일은 항상 도전 사항이었다; 현재의 정치적인 민감한 문제가 잦아들고, 일상적인 동맹 사업이 재계 된 이후에도 한미동맹 사업은 중장기적으로는 더더욱 도전 사항이 될 공산이 크다. 인식을 전환하도록 미국정부가 노력했지만, 한국정부는 늘 아프간(그리고 이라크) 지원을 한미동맹에 대한 한국의 의지의 표현으로 바라본다. 국회와 한국국민은 그 점을 내용을 인식하고 있고, 어떠한 추가 지원 결정은 미국의 압력에 기인한 것으로 문제에 접근할 걸로 예상할 수 있다. 쇠고기 시위가 끝난 마당에, 한국정부가 위험을 감수한다는 게 더더욱 어렵다고 판명 난다고 하겠다. 이는 아프간에 추가 인력을 보내는 경우 특히 사실인데, 그 이유는 한국정부는 사상자가 나면 대규모 시위로 번질 수 있다고 믿고 있기 때문이다. 그러나 한미동맹을 지원하는 일이라면 한국정부는 여전히 아프간에서 도울 수 있는 모든 것을 하길 원한다. 그러나 적절한 동기유발, 예로 한국으로부터 어떤 지원을 기대하는지에 대한 분명한 메시지, 그리고 미국이 가장 가치를 두는 지원의 형태가 실마리가 될 것이다. 그러한 지원 요청은 추가적 인적자원이 아닌 재화와 서비스에 국한된다는 게 우리의 권고이다.
//버시바우//
프와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL1243.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OSD FOR ASD JAMES SHINN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2018 
TAGS: PARM [Arms Controls and Disarmament], MASS [Military Assistance and Sales], PREL [External Political Relations], AF [Afghanistan], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: ROKG REVIEWING ITS AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION 
ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A. SEOUL 1204 
     B. SEOUL 1174 
     C. SEOUL 1153 
     D. SEOUL 1145 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun, Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY.  In the face of multiple requests for 
assistance from the U.S., Afghanistan, and other nations, as 
well as renewed Taliban threats against Korean interests in 
Afghanistan and concerns over political sensitivities arising 
out of the recent beef protests, the ROKG has started an 
internal review of its overall reconstruction assistance 
plans for Afghanistan.  As a result, the dispatch slated for 
mid-June of a ROK Police Trainer survey team to Kabul has 
been postponed until the review can be completed.  The ROKG 
plans to consider the multiple pending requests for 
additional contributions, including police trainers, military 
train and equip, an expanded medical and vocational team at 
Bagram, and economic development and elections assistance, 
before committing to providing any additional assistance. 
The ROKG will deliver on its recent Paris Conference 
commitment of USD 30 million in grant aid and the ROK 
civilian medical team at Bagram Air Base will open its new 
clinic on June 30th as scheduled.  Encouraging the ROKG to 
make additional contributions is likely to become more 
difficult in the short to medium term.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------- 
MANY REQUESTS, MANY RISKS 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) The past six weeks have seen candlelight vigil after 
candlelight vigil as the ROK public have continued to express 
their dissatisfaction with President Lee Myung-bak and his 
administration's handling of the decision to resume imports 
of U.S. beef (see reftels).  Progress on U.S.-ROK Alliance 
issues across the board has fallen victim to the resulting 
political paralysis, as ROKG officials have taken care to put 
all problematic Alliance issues on the back burner for fear 
of inciting the nascent anti-Americanism that the protests 
thus far have assiduously avoided.  The question of the ROK's 
continued role in Afghanistan appears to be suffering a 
similar fate. 
 
¶3. (C) Despite a genuine desire and expectation among the 
Korean public for a greater international role for the ROK, 
participation in international efforts in Iraq and 
Afghanistan remain overwhelmingly seen through the U.S.-ROK 
Alliance lens.  On June 19, Kim Hyon-du, Deputy, U.S.-ROK 
Security Cooperation Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade (MOFAT) told poloff on that the ROKG has put on 
hold all decisions on further ROK contributions to 
Afghanistan until a full review of the options and benefits 
can be completed.  As part of this review, Kim informed 
poloff that the ROKG had indefinitely postponed the planned 
dispatch of a survey team to Kabul in mid-June as part of 
preparations to send ROK police trainers.  Kim explained that 
a comprehensive review was necessary for two reasons.  First, 
he said at last count, the ROKG had received fourteen 
nonpapers in recent months asking for different types of ROK 
contributions.  The second reason, which Kim took great care 
to explain repeatedly, was that the current political climate 
would not support a decision to commit any additional 
resources in Afghanistan at this time.  Kim said the timeline 
for the ROKG review was unclear, but emphasized that 
decisions were unlikely until after the Lee administration 
recovered from the current crisis. 
 
¶4. (C) While political sensitivities stemming from the beef 
protests are likely to subside over time, ROKG officials 
continue to emphasize that the safety and security of ROK 
personnel and interests in Afghanistan is the number one 
factor in any decisions to contribute to Afghanistan's 
reconstruction.  ROKG interlocutors point to last year's ROK 
hostage crisis in Afghanistan as a significant limitation on 
what the public would support.  (Note: In August 2007, 
Taliban terrorists kidnapped and held hostage 23 ROK relief 
workers in Afghanistan, killing two of the Korean hostages. 
The hostage situation received extensive ROK media coverage 
and generated significant negative public reaction for the 
ROKG's poor handling of the negotiations.  End Note.) 
 
¶5. (C) In May, just before the beef protests began in 
earnest, ROK sensitivities on Afghanistan were again 
heightened when the Yonhap news service reported that a 
Taliban spokesperson contacted one of its reporters directly 
and promised to target Korean individuals, diplomats, 
facilities, and business interests throughout Afghanistan if 
the ROK decided to again send police, military, or 
missionaries.  According to MOFAT's Kim Hyon-du, if there 
were another hostage incident in Afghanistan because the ROKG 
decided to send troops or police, after last month's press 
coverage of the warnings, it could become a magnet for 
Anti-American, or Anti-Alliance, sentiment.  More than that, 
the Lee Administration could again be paralyzed through more 
protests.  The ROKG does not want its contributions to 
Afghanistan to be a "burden on the ROK, the U.S., or the 
U.S.-ROK Alliance," he said. 
 
---------------------------- 
WHAT ROK HAS COMMITTED TO DO 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) While further ROK contributions are under review, Kim 
emphasized that the ROKG will continue to implement, on the 
timeline as planned, those projects already underway, 
including: 
 
-- MEDICAL/VOCATIONAL TEAM: After terminating its 
tremendously-successful military medical unit deployment in 
December 2007, the ROKG dispatched a KOICA-led, civilian 
medical team to establish a new clinic at Bagram Air Base in 
January.  As of June, the team of civilian doctors, nurses, 
and medical administrative staff has grown to approximately 
25 and the new two-floor, 150-patient capacity clinic is 
slated to open on June 30.  As originally planned, the ROKG 
plans to send an additional 5-6 members, including a few 
National Police and KOICA contractors who will open a 
vocational training program co-located with the medical team 
by the end of 2008.  (Note: This medical and vocational team 
is what the ROKG refers to as a "ROK PRT.") 
 
-- USD 30 MILLION IN GRANT AID: At the June Paris Conference, 
the ROKG pledged an additional USD 30 million in grant aid 
for reconstruction in Afghanistan, to be provided in roughly 
equal increments over the next three years.  The date 
disbursements will begin remains undetermined. 
 
--------------------------------- 
OTHER OPTIONS UNDER CONSIDERATION 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Decisions on all other potential ROKG contributions in 
Afghanistan have been postponed, however.  Kim repeatedly 
stressed that the pause to review further contributions in 
Afghanistan did NOT signal a diminished ROK commitment to 
helping Afghanistan rebuild.  Rather, the ROKG wanted to take 
this time to give full and careful consideration to the 
numerous possibilities, including: 
 
-- EXPANDED MEDICAL/VOCATIONAL TEAM: Kim said that the ROKG 
is still considerably favoring expanding the numbers and 
scope of its medical and vocational training program at 
Bagram.  ROKG officials continue to label this option "an 
expanded PRT" role, but indicate that it will NOT expand to 
include a military deployment to provide security.  DFM Lee 
reiterated earlier calls for U.S.-provided security for an 
expanded "ROK PRT" with ASD Shinn on June 18. 
 
-- ELECTIONS ASSISTANCE: Kim Hyon-du said that the ROKG 
delegation at the Paris Conference earlier this month had 
received requests from the U.S. and Afghanistan to provide 
unspecified "elections assistance" for next year's nationwide 
elections in Afghanistan.  Kim explained that the ROKG was 
requesting additional information through its embassies in 
Washington and Kabul to determine what this assistance would 
entail, but he indicated that the ROKG could favorably 
consider some sort of financial or civilian assistance for 
Afghanistan's elections. 
 
-- POLICE TRAINING AND EQUIPMENT: In response to high-level 
U.S. requests, including from Secretary of Defense Gates in 
early-June, the ROKG had planned to dispatch a survey team to 
Kabul to determine whether the ROK could send up to two dozen 
police trainers to assist the Afghan National Police. 
Originally slated for mid-June, the dispatch of the survey 
team has been indefinitely postponed pending the ROKG review 
of its overall assistance programs for Afghanistan. 
 
-- TRAIN AND EQUIP AFGHAN MILITARY: Kim said that there had 
been multiple requests to train various components of the 
Afghan military and provide paramilitary equipment to 
military and law enforcement forces, but indicated that the 
details of the requests were unclear. 
 
-- AIRPORT RECONSTRUCTION PROJECT: At the Paris Conference, 
Deputy Foreign Minister Oh Joon consulted with the Lithuanian 
representatives on potential ROK support of the planned 
reconstruction of the Chaghcharan airport. 
 
-- ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE: Kim relayed that DFM Lee 
was interested in learning more about ASD Shinn's suggestion 
at his June 18 meeting that the ROK provide some sort of 
"economic development" assistance based on the ROK's 
extensive post-war experience and economic success.  This 
could be a promising option, DFM Lee said, particularly if 
ROK concerns about security could be mitigated. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Encouraging the ROKG to expand its contributions to 
reconstruction and stabilization efforts in Afghanistan has 
always been a challenge; it is likely to become even more 
challenging in the short to medium-term, even after the 
current political sensitivities subside and the day-to-day 
business of the Alliance resumes.  Despite USG efforts to 
shift perceptions, the ROKG has always viewed any 
contributions it makes in Afghanistan (and Iraq) as a way of 
demonstrating the ROK commitment to the U.S.-ROK Alliance. 
The National Assembly and Korean public are aware of this and 
can be expected to take issue with any decisions for further 
assistance seen as coming from U.S. pressure.  In the 
post-beef protests atmosphere, convincing the ROKG to take 
this risk with their public may prove more difficult than 
ever.  This is particularly true of sending additional 
personnel to Afghanistan, because the ROKG believes any 
casualty would lead to massive protests.  However, in support 
of the Alliance, the ROKG will still want to do all it can to 
help in Afghanistan, but proper motivation, for instance in 
the form of a crystal clear message about what ROK 
contributions are expected and most valued by the U.S., will 
be key.  Our recommendation is that these requests be limited 
to goods and services, not additional personnel. 
VERSHBOW
</file>