^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  [[http://wikileaks.org/cable/2008/12/08SEOUL2307.html|08SEOUL2307]]  |  2008-12-02 22:15  |  기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PINS MARR MCAP KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 한미 방위비 분담(잠정)특별협정 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 002307
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
텍스트 편집 수정본((C O R R E C T E D COPY TEXT EDITS ))

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 12/02/2018
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PINS(([National Security])), MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), MCAP(([Military Capabilities])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 한미 방위비 분담(잠정)특별협정
분류자: 정치 공사 참사관 조셉 윤.((POL M/C JOSEPH YUN.)) 근거 1.4 (b),(d).
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/08/23 23:29//
===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 11월 19일~20일에 미합중국과 대한민국 대표단은 6번째로 호놀룰루에서 회동하였으며, 올해 방위비 분담 특별협정의 마지막 협상이 될 듯한 이번 협상은 잭슨 맥도널드 대사와 조병제 대사가 수석대표로 나섰다. 회담의 시작은 형편없었으나, 마무리는 잘 되었는데, 양측은 새로운 방위비 분담 특별협정의 아래와 같은 요소들에 (잠정적으로) 합의하였다:
  * 5년 협정(2009~2013).

  * 노동과 건설 그리고 군수비용 내용의 주한미군 비인적주둔군비용에 대한 한국의 지원분은 대략 4조 원이다.

  * 매년 4퍼센트의 상한선으로 하는 한국의 소비자물가지수를 더하여 2008년 방위비 지원분을 시작으로 5년간 매해 증가한다. 이로써 한국의 비인적주둔비용 분담의 총비율이 현 43퍼센트에서 협정의 말미에는 대략 47퍼센트로 올라갈 것이다.

  * 협정 기한 중 매해, 한국정부는 설계와 시공감리 건설 지원분 12퍼센트를 현금으로 제공하는데 동의하였다(주한미군의 요구사항).

  * 남은 88퍼센트의 건설 지원분을 보면 2009년은 현금 지급에서 현물 지원분으로 30퍼센트가 전환되고, 2010년에는 현물 지원분이 60퍼센트, 그리고 2011년에는 88퍼센트로 전환된다. 설계와 시공감리에 제공되는 현금을 제외하곤, 한국정부가 3년 안에(한국의 핵심 요구사항) 100퍼센트 현물 지원으로 전환된다는 주장이 가능해질 것이다.

  * 양측은 현물 건설 프로그램의 이행을 안내할 주한미군의 9개 원칙 문안에 대해 원칙적으로 합의하였다.

  * 새 협정은 연합토지관리계획 이행을 위해서 방위비 분담 기금의 전용을 제약하는 내용을 포함하지 않으며(미 국방부의 핵심 요구사항), 연합토지관리계획의 완료 기일을 본 협정에 명시하지 않았다.

  * 본 협정은 그 대신에 미국과 한국은 용산기지이전사업과 연합토지관리계획의 조속한 완료를 위해 최대의 노력을 다할 것이라고 단순하게 서술할 것이다.

2. (기밀) 협상을 마감할 때, 양국 정부가 승인한 방위비 분담 특별협정과 해당 이행 협정의 본문 초안을 미국 측이 제작하기로 합의하였다. 양국 대표단은 12월 9~10일 워싱턴에서 다시 회동하기로 동의하였지만, 필요할 때만 해당한다. 만일 양국 정부가 이 잠정 협정을 승인한다면, 서명식은 올해가 가기 전에 서울에서 치러질 것이다. 캐슬린 스티븐스 주한 미국 대사가 미합중국을 대표하고, 유명환 한국 외교통상부 장관이 한국을 대표하여 서명하게 된다. //요점 끝.//

===== 소모임 오찬에서의 불안한 출발 =====

3. (기밀) 11월 19일 방위비 분담금 4차 공식 협상에 앞서 갖은 한국이 주재한 오찬에서, 조병제 외교통상부 방위비 분담 특별협정 대사는 한국이 요청한 실험적인 현물 건설사업에 //“진출입로”//를((번역 주: 일종의 출구전략이라고 이해하면 된다)) 포함하자는 미국 제안을 거부하였다. 그러나 오찬 과정에서 주한미군 기획참모, 일반참모 프랭크 팬터 장군은 조 대사가 오해한 듯하다면서, 미국은 만일 현물 사업에 여러 문제가 있다면 현금 기반의 건설로 완전히 복귀한다는 의미라고 하였다. 팬터 장군과 안보협상과의 잭슨 맥도널드는 만일 하나 혹은 그 이상의 현물 사업이 제 기능을 못하고, 다른 사업들은 순조롭게 진행된다면, 주한미군은 문제가 된 사업에 대해서 현금 지급으로 복귀하도록 단지 요청할 것이라고 바로잡았다.
===== 개회 제안(첫날 전체회의) =====

4. (기밀) 한 시간 후에 맥도널드 대사는 논의할 세 가지 주제를 열거하면서 안보연구 목적 아시아태평양 센터에서 갖은 공식 협상을 개시하였다. 1) 새 방위비 분담 특별협정의 총분담액; 2) 현물 건설 사업 전환의 세부협상원칙; 3) 연합토지관리계획 완료 연도. 조병제는 의제에 동의하면서, 한국의 첫해 한국 지원분은 동결하고, 2년과 3년은 국내총생산 디플레이터와((번역 주: 현재 유통되고 있는 용어를 그대로 쓴다.)) 결부된 증가분을 딸린 한국의 지난번 3년 협정 제안을 재차 언급하면서 시작하였다. 조병제는 3년 협정 기간 현금에서 현물 건설로 100퍼센트 전환 주장을 밀어붙였다. 그는 늦어도 2014년까지 미국이 연합토지관리계획을 완료하겠다는 동의가 필요함을 역시 강조하였다.

5. (기밀) 맥도널드 대사는 조병제의 동결 요구를 거부하면서, 그것은 실재 감소에 상당하기 때문에 가망이 없다고 말하였다. 맥도널드는 방위비 분담 특별협정상에 연 증가율을 결정하기 위해서 국내총생산 가격 수정 인자가 아니라, 한국의 소비자물가지수를 사용하자고 맥도널드는 제안하였다. 그는 양측이 전체 분담액에 대해 견해차가 크다고 지적하면서, 미국의 제안인 한국 원화 8,510억 원에서 소비자물가지수가 결부된 원화 8,350억 원으로 줄이자고 제안하였다. 그는 한국 한미동맹을 강화하겠다는 이명박 대통령의 열망이 담긴 발언을 상기하면서, 방위비 분담금 지원을 증가시키는 것보다 그 열망을 증명하기에 더 낳은 좋은 방법은 없을 것이라고 지적하였다. 그는 2014년 즈음에 연합토지관리계획의 완성을 기대한다는 한국의 바람은 비현실적이며, 특히 한국정부가 방위비 분담금 지원을 감소시키려 한다면, 새로운 평택에 제2보병연대 시설의 건설이 더욱 지체될 것이 분명하기 때문이다. 조 대사는 그런 식으로 말하지 말라고 요청하면서, 그 이유는 연합토지관리계획의 지체에 한국 기금의 책임이 있다는 말은 부당하기 때문이라고 했다.

6. (기밀) 조병제와 소장지명자인 조익봉 부 수석 대표는 한국 측은 미국 측에 많은 선물을 이미 제공했다고 주장하였다. 조병제는 특히 주장하길, 미국이 우리가 요구하는 사안을 협정에 포함하게 되어, 방위비 분담 특별협정을 국회 회기 회의에 부치려면 이 문제에 대해 더욱 협조해야 할 필요가 있다고 주장하였다. 맥도널드는 건설 사업을 현금에서 현물 지원으로 전환하기로 미국이 합의한 것은 한국이 국회에서 이를 본보기로 삼는데 도움되기 위함이라고 대답하였다. 그러나 미국정부는 결코 동결을 합의하지 않는다는 점에 주의를 당부했다.
===== 현물 사업의 구조(주한미군의 9가지 원칙) =====

7. (기밀) 양측의 합의로 양측 수석 대표는 현물 건설 사업의 구조에 대한 논의로 이동하였다. 맥도널드 대사는 한국이 현물 사업의 이행을 위해 주한미군이 사전에 제시한 9가지 원칙을 활용하기로 동의를 한다면 현금에서 현물 지원으로의 전환에 기꺼이 동의하겠다는 미국의 입장을 재차 언급하였다. 미국 대표단은 한국정부가 원하는 것보다 더 점진적으로 단계적인 현물 건설로의 전환을 출범시켜야 할 것이라고 추가로 설명하였다. 미국 공병의 댄 러셀 대령은 차후 연도상에 현물 지원율이 88퍼센트를 절대 넘을 수 없는 이유는 주한미군이 사업 설계사의 고용과 시공감리 실행을 위해 12퍼센트의 현금 지원분이 필요하기 때문이다. 그러나 만일 설계를 건설공사의 일부로 간주하지 않는다면, 한국정부는 협상의 시한 동안의 100퍼센트 현물 건설로 전환되고 있다고 말할 수도 있다고 미국 대표단은 지적하였다.

8. (기밀) 조 대사는 주한미군의 현금 요구사항에 동의하면서, 한국정부는 3년 내로 완전한 현물 제도로 이동하고 있다고 말할 수 있길 희망했다. 맥도널드 대사는 5년 협정을 제안했는데, 첫해는 현물 건설을 30퍼센트로 전환하고, 2년 차에는 45퍼센트, 3년 차에는 60퍼센트, 4년 차에는 75퍼센트, 마지막 해는 88퍼센트를 제시했다. 조병제는 5년 협정은 여전히 논의의 여지가 있지만, 3년 내로 현물 전환이 한국의 결론이다.

9. (기밀) 현물 사업을 대한 주한미군의 9가지 원칙을 한 줄씩 살펴보았다. 조병제는 주한미군 사령관 월터 샤프 장군이 청한 //“우선순위와 표준, 그리고 일정”//을 정하자는 미국의 요건을 존중한다고 하였다. 맥도널드는 협상의 마지막 일정을 마친 후, 팬터 소장과 최 소장은 9가지 원칙 중에 6가지에 합의를 하였으나, 남은 3가지에 대한 추가적인 논의를 요한다고 지적하였다. 7번째 원칙―입찰계약에서 절약된 금액은 앞으로 사업에 사용된다―에 대해서, 한국의 법에선 입찰계약에서 절약된 금액은 다른 사업에 적용되도록 하고 있지만, 같은 회계연도에 한해서라고 설명하였다. 팬터 소장은 한국법에 해당 규칙에 대한 예외가 있는 걸로 알고 있다고 응수하면서, 원칙 7은 원칙 8과―미집행 기금은 이후의 연도로 이월―왜 관련되어 있는지를 지적하였다. 한국의 대표단은 한국정부는 미집행 기금을 방지하기 위한 모든 노력을 꼭 해야만 하지만, 실상 해당 기금들이 차후 연도로 이월될 수 있다. 그러나 한국법은 입찰계약에서 절약된 기금도 똑같이 이월되는 것을 재가하지 않는다. 추가적인 논의 끝에 양측은 입찰계약에서 절약된 기금도 같은 회계연도에 한에서 다른 사업에 적용하기로 했다. 그러나 만일 다른 사업에서도 회계연도에 집행될 수 없다면, 해당 기금은 다음 연도로 이월되도록 합의를 하였다. 국회에 사전 통지를 할 필요가 있긴 하지만, 그러한 연장은 대개 승인된다고 국방부 대표단은 설명하였다. 한국 측은 기금이 소멸하는 것을 방지하는 열쇠는 해당 사업을 예산이 책정되는 그해에 한해 계약을 체결하는 것이라고 강조하였다.

10. (기밀) 원칙 9에 대한 논의는―진출입로 원칙((번역 주: 일종의 출구전략이라고 이해하면 된다, off-ramp))―오찬 후에 이루어졌다. 한국의 요청에 따라, 대사는 주한미군은 현물사업에 대한 일종의 점검을 필요할 것이며, 만일 건설 사업 중 하나 혹은 그 이상의 실행 상에 심각한 문제가 생긴다면, 주한미군은 문제 된 사업에 대한 현금 지급을 요구함으로써, 건설회사를 고용해 사업을 완성할 수 있게 한다고 전체회의에서 분명히 밝혔다. 그러나 이러한 진출입로 원칙은 해당 사업의 완성이 위험에 처할 정도의 심각한 문제로 몸살을 앓을 때에만 적용될 것이다. 그는 미국이 현물사업으로의 전환에 합의함으로써 위험을 감수하고 있다고 설명하였다. 그러나 주한미군에게 무엇보다 가장 중요한 것은 필요한 시설물을 새 시간에 짓고, 미국 표준을 적용하는 것이다. 그는 원칙 9에 대한 적절한 문안을 결정하기 위한 실무단을 구성하자는 조병제의 요청을 거부하면서, 이전에도 비슷한 실무급 노력이 있었고, 양측 간에 존재하는 상당한 격차를 줄이는 데 실패했다고 지적하였다. 조병제는 미국이 제안한 문안을 다시 한 번 읽어 보라고 요청하였다. 맥도널드가 그렇게 하자, 최 장군은 //“좋습니다. 국방부는 승인합니다.”//라고 말하였다.

===== 방위비 분담 특별협정 안에 해당 원칙 포함 =====

11. (기밀) 이어진 논의에서, 조 대사는 원칙 9를 방위비 분담금 특별협정문에 포함할 의향인지를 물으면서, 그렇다는 말이 돌아오자 크게 놀라움을 표시하였다. 미국 측은 해당 원칙에 대한 협정에 대해 법적 구속력이 필요하다고 했는데, 그 의미는 해당 원칙들을 방위비 분담금 특별협정에 포함되거나 부속서로 첨부되어야 할 필요가 있다는 뜻이다. 조병제는 처음 듣는 소리라고 주장했지만, 맥도널드는 현물 건설로 전환하자는 한국의 요청을 충족시키기 위해 미국이 해당 원칙에 대한 양국 정부 간 협정을 갖추도록 해야 했음을 협상 초기부터 조병제는 알고 있었다고 응수하였다. 그는 방위비 분담 특별협정에 현물사업을 언급하도록 할 것인지를 묻자. 조병제는 그렇다고 했다. 맥도널드는 본 사업에 대한 이행 원칙들이 현물 사업 문안과 함께 언급하도록 함이 근본적으로 공정한 일이라고 했다. 조병제는 방위비 분담금 이행약정은( 국방부와 주한미군이 서명하지만, 반면에 방위비 분담금 특별협정 자체는 주한 미국대사와 외교통상부 장관이 서명하였다.) 법적 구속력이 갖춘 문서라고 주장하였다. 이행약정은 방위비 분담금 특별협정과 같은 수준이 아니라고 지적하면서, 맥도널드는 만일 현물사업을 관장하는 해당 원칙들이 현물 사업 그 자체와 같은 협정에 언급될 수 없다면, 미국 측은 현물 사업건설로의 이동 제안을 없던 일로 하겠다며, 방위비 분담금 특별협정이 현금 기반의 제도로 되돌리자고 요청하였다.

12. (기밀) 최 장군은 미국의 입장을 생각해본 이후에, 만일 해당 원칙들이 방위비 분담 특별협정에 첨부되어야 한다면, 해당 원칙을 가능한 단순한 문안으로 하는 게 최선이라고 제안하였다. 팬터는 주한미군의 원 제안이 단순한 평서문으로 각 문장을 가공함으로써 간결하게 한 내용이라고 지적하였다. 한국의 후속 역제안 내용이 문안에 상당량 덧붙여졌다. 조 대사는 국회의 철저한 검토에 대해 우려를 제기하였다. 대사관 정치군사팀장 데이비드 울프는 방위비 분담 특별협정 이행약정이 국회에 보고될 것인지를 물었다. 조병제가 그럴 것이라고 확인해주자, 데이비드 울프는 외교통상부가 국회와 공유할 문안을 왜 방위비 분담 특별협정 자체에나, 적어도 참조의 형태로 포함될 수 없는지를 물었다. 맥도널드 대사는 기술적인 상세 내용은 이행약정에 포함하는 게 적절하지만, 이행약정을 지침 하는 해당 원칙이나 현물사업으로 전환은 한낱 기술적인 상술 내용이 아닌 그 이상이라고 덧붙였다. 해당 원칙들은 방위비 분담 특별협정에 근거해 실행되는 건설 방식의 근본적인 전환을 대변한다.

===== 연합토지관리계획의 완성일 =====

13. (기밀) 새로운 논의 영역으로 들어와서, 한국 측은 국내 정치적 압력을 언급하면서 방위비 분담 특별협정 안에 연합토지관리계획이 2014년쯤에 완료될 것임을 언급하는데 동의하라고 미국을 압박하고 있다. 맥도널드 대사는 거절하면서, 그는 지키지도 못할 것을 알면서 방위비 분담 특별협정에 기한을 집어넣는데 동의할 수 없다고 지적하였다. 그는 양국이 더 이상의 지연 없이 연합토지관리계획을 완성하도록 최대의 노력을 다하겠다는 성명을 제안하였지만, 그것이 자신이 할 수 있는 최대치라고 했는데, 그 점은 주한미군이 분명히 한 바 있듯이, 모든 일이 순조롭게 진행된다고 해도, 연합토지관리계획 건설은 일러야 2016년까지는 완성되지 않기 때문이다. 팬터 소장은 방위비 분담 특별협정 안에 2014년이란 (연합토지관리계획) 완성기일을 언급하자고 압박함으로써, 한국 측이 종합사업관리 용역업체가 무슨 보고를 할지 무시하고 있다. (번역 주: 미국은 해당 용역업체의 보고서를 본 뒤에 사업의 진행이나 일정을 정하자고 참여정부 당시 평택에서 사업이 시작될 때부터 주장했었다.) 그는 공학 기술적인 고려가 아니라, 정치적인 고려가 한국의 입장을 추동하는 것처럼 보인다고 지적하였다.

===== 미국이 주재한 저녁자리에서의 교착상태 =====

14. (기밀) 협상 첫날 끝 무렵에, 국방장관실은 한국 대표단을 위한 소모임 저녁을 주재하였다. 조 대사는 한국의 다양한 국내 정치 문제를 해결하는데 미국의 지원을 다시 한 번 간청하는 것으로 마감되었다. 그는 미국 측의 추가적인 상당한 양보를 구했지만, 전번 10월 협상의 한국 제안과는 다른 추가적인 움직임은 제시하지 않았다. 저녁 끝자락에, 양 측은 교착상태에 봉착한 듯 보였고, 외교통상부 김용현 한미안보협력과장이 다음 아침에 이틀 차 협상을 벌일 것인지 질문을 하게 되였다. 교착상태는 저녁 식사 이후에 한국 관계관들이 미국의 입장에 대한 몇 가지 사안에 관한 분명한 의견을 입증하고, 구할 추가적인 관련 논의를 모색하기 위하여 미국 대표단의 핵심 구성원들에게 몇 차례의 마지막 전화 통화를 하게 되었다.

15. (기밀) 최 장군은 당일 저녁에 한국 대표단은 협상의 상황에 대해 전화로 청와대에 보고하였고, 내일 본 협상을 타결하는데 모든 노력을 다하라는 분명한 명령을 받았다고 나중에 대사관 정치군사팀장에게 밝혔다. 조 대사는 청와대가 부여한 권한으로 협상을 타결 짓는데 융통성을 확보하였다.

===== 돌파구 (전체회의 2일째) =====

16. (기밀) 다음 날 아침 (11월 20일) 맥도널드 대사와의 대면 회동에서, 조 대사는 한국의 새 제안을 제시하였다. 맥도널드의 요청에 따라, 조병제는 오전 9시에 시작하는 전체회의에서 새 제안을 반복하였다. 조 대사는 5년 협정을 요청하였다. 그는 2009년 지원분 동결 요구를 거둬들였고(그가 한국의 경제적 어려움 때문에 필요하다고 초반에 요구했던 내용), 소비자물가지수와 국내총생산 디플레이터의 평균을 사용한 5년간 매해 분담 지원금을 증가시키는 제안을 하였다. 그렇게 되면 단지 연간 평균 1.8퍼센트 증가하는 결과가 될 것이다; 한국의 인플레이션이 지난 5년간 평균 2.82퍼센트였음을 고려할 때 실질 단위 감소이다. 조병제는 처음 3년 안에 현물 건설사업 완전한 도입을 요청하였다. 그러나 12퍼센트 현금 지원은 주한미군이 요청한 바대로 차치할 것을 수용하였다. 그는 한국이 주한미군의 원칙 사항들을 수용할 것이며, 그 원칙들이 법적 구속력을 갖는 방식에 동의할 것이라고 했다. 그는 반대급부로 미국이 방위비 분담 특별협정 안에 연합토지관리계획의 완료일인 2014년을 포함하는데 동의하라고 요청하였다.

17. (기밀) 맥도널드 대사는 개선된 한국의 제안을 환영하였지만, 연례 증액을 결정하기 위한 소비자물가지수와 국내총생산 디플레이터 평균의 사용을 거절하였다. 그는 미국정부가 2014년보다 더 오래 소요될 것임을 알면서, 연합토지관리계획이 2014년에 완료된다고 말할 수 없는 이유를 다시 한 번 설명하였다. 그는 소비자물가지수와 결부된 현물 사업의 4년 단계적 도입을 제안하였다. 그는 5년 협정 대 3년 협정에 대한 찬반 논쟁이 있다고 말하면서, 협정의 기간보다는 협정의 내용이 더 중요하다고 지적하였다. 그러나 5년 방위비 분담 특별협정을 미국은 선호하는데, 다만 좋은 협정이 나온다면 말이다. 그는 내년도 인플레이션 급등 예정에 대한 한국의 걱정을 미국은 이해한다면서 계속 말을 잇길, 그러므로 우리는 기꺼이 소비자물가지수에 5퍼센트 상한선을 둘 것이라고 말하였다. 그는 미국의 제안인 한화 7,415억 원 요청의 전체 금액도 줄이겠다고 제안하였다. 마지막으로, 그는 미국이 방위비 분담 특별협정 서명에 동의하기 전에 원칙 사항들이 최종 결정되어야 할 필요가 있다고 한국 측에 알렸다.

18. (기밀) 조 대사는 2009년에 단지 30퍼센트 이내로 현물 전환을 시작할 필요에 대한 이유를 이해한다고 말하였다. 그러나 단계적 도입이 4년이 아닌, 3년 만에 완료될 수 있다고 촉구하였다. 그는 소비자물가지수는 방위비 분담 특별협정의 노동 부문에 적용될 수 있다고 동의하였다. 그러나 건설 부문에 국내총생산 디플레이터를 사용하자고 주장하길, 그렇게 하는 게 더 적합하다고 말하였다. 그는 소비자물가지수에 대한 5퍼센트는 상한선이 너무 높다고 말하면서, 3퍼센트 제안으로 응수하였다. 최 장군은 방위비 분담 특별협정에 포함하려고 미국이 제안한 문안에 찬성한다고 하면서, 양국 정부가 연합토지관리계획의 조속한 완성을 위해 최대의 노력을 다하고, 또한 용산기지이전사업도 마찬가지라고 덧붙였다. 맥도널드는 용산기지이전사업은 내 서류목록의 밖에 있다고 하면서, 그러나 그런 말씀은 동맹을 위해선 좋은 말씀인 이유는 우리가 함께 일하고 있기 때문이라고 대답하였다.

19. (기밀) 소비자물가지수 상한선으로 돌아와서, 맥도널드는 주한미군 주둔 요건에 부응하기 위한 자원을 보유하는데 미국은 걱정하고 있다고 말하였다. 그는 단 3퍼센트란 인플레이션 상한선은 기금의 공백을 크게 벌린다고 말하였다. 그는 대신 4퍼센트에서 타협하자고 제안하였다. 그는 미국 측은 원칙적으로 3년 안에 현물 전환을 완성하는데 동의할 것이지만, 건설 입찰과 계약의 작업을 고려할 때 인간적으로 가능하지 않을 수 있다며 주의를 당부하였다. 그는 주한미군의 원칙 중 하나인 현물사업의 전환이 어떻게 돌아가는지 쌍방에 의한 연례 점검과정의 재가 여부를 지적하였다.

20. (기밀) 조병제는 국내총생산 디플레이터를 계속 주장하면서, 이전 방위비 분담 특별협상에서 사용되었기 때문에, 그 예가 좋은 전례라고 했다. 맥도널드 대사는 과거에 사용되기는 했지만, 한국의 지원 금액상에 3~8퍼센트의 꽤 큰 실질 증가에 덧붙여진 것이라고 응수하였다. 낙담한 조병제는 자신이 얻은 게 아무것도 없다고 불평하였다. 주둔군지위협정 사무국의 밥 마운츠는 그와는 정반대로 우리는 양측에게 승리가 될 협정문을 도출하기 직전이라고 지적하였다. 인플레이션이 과거 5년간 평균 2.82퍼센트에 불과했다는 조병제의 논지에 대한 대응으로, 대사관 정치군사팀장 울프는 우리가 과거 5년에 대해 걱정하는 것이 아니라, 앞으로 5년이라고 말하였다. 그리고 모든 지표에서 인플레이션율이 재차 떨어지기 전에는 상승할 것으로 나타나고 있다. 경제적인 근거를 보자면, 소비자물가지수 4퍼센트 상한선은 한미 양국의 입장에 합리적인 양보안이라고 말하면서, 미국이 이익을 내려는 게 아니며, 단순히 미군의 주둔 요건에 부응하길 원한다고 날카롭게 지적하였다.

21. (기밀) 이쯤에서 조 대사는 국내총생산 디플레이터를 사용하자는 제안을 거둬들이겠다고 말하면서, 소비자물가지수 4퍼센트 상한선 절충안의 승인을 위해 정부로 가져가겠다고 했다.

22. (기밀) 맥도널드는 그 뒤로 제안된 방위비 분담 특별협정의 핵심 사안들을 하나씩 검토하였고, 사안마다 조병제의 분명한 동의를 확보하였다.

23. (기밀) 그 이후에 협상은 빠르게 휴회 되었고, 양측은 방위비 분담 특별협정과 이행약정에 대한 초안 준비를 주한미군 법무관의 특별참모인 데이비드 라즈버와 정치군사국 법률고문인 탐 헤럴드 지휘간이 준비하기로 의견을 모았다. 본문은 차후 이른 시일 안에 한국정부의 심사를 위해 제출될 것이다. 또 다른 협상일정은 필요치 않을 듯하다고 동의하였지만, 만일 필요하다면 워싱턴에서 가질 제20차 한미 안보정책구상회의 이전인 11월 9~10일에 열릴 것이다.

24. (비분류) 맥도널드 대사는 이 전문을 승인하였다.
//스티븐스//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/---12/08seoul2307|프와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
<WRAP center round info 80%>
본 전문은 상당히 중요한 내용이다. 이명박 정부가 들어서고 처음으로 5년짜리 방위비분담특별협정에 서명했을 뿐만 아니라, 방위비분담특별협정의 성격을 이해하는 데 긴요하기 때문이다. 꼭 읽어보시라 권고한다. 이 잠정 협정의 내용이 그대로 발의하고 서명된다. 서명된 [[09seoul82|방위비 분담금 특별협정을]] 참조하라.
</WRAP>

===== 원본 및 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL2307.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 002307 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY TEXT EDITS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/02/2018 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PINS [National Security], MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], MCAP [Military Capabilities], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: U.S.-ROK SMA (AD REF) AGREEMENT 
 
Classified By: POL M/C JOSEPH YUN.  REASONS 1.4 (b),(d). 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (C) On November 19-20, U.S. and Republic of Korea 
delegations, led respectively by Ambassador Jackson McDonald 
and Ambassador Cho Byung-jae, met in Honolulu for the sixth 
and likely final round of this year's Special Measures 
Agreement (SMA) defense cost-sharing negotiation.  The talks 
started off poorly but ended well, with both sides agreeing 
(ad ref) to the following elements of a new SMA: 
 
--- A 5 year agreement (2009-2013). 
 
--- Totaling approximately 4 trillion won in ROK 
contributions to USFK's non-personnel stationing costs (NPSC) 
in the categories of labor, construction and logistics. 
 
--- Increases each of the five years, beginning with the 
amount of the 2008 SMA contribution plus the ROK consumer 
price index (CPI) capped at 4 percent annually.  This would 
raise the overall percentage of the ROK share of the NPSC 
from its current contribution of 43 percent to approximately 
47 percent by the end of the agreement. 
 
--- In each of the years, the ROKG agreed to provide 12 
percent of its construction contribution in cash for design 
and oversight functions (a USFK requirement). 
 
--- The remaining 88 percent of the construction contribution 
would shift from payment in cash to a 30 percent in-kind 
contribution in 2009, a 60 percent in-kind contribution in 
2010, and an 88 percent in 2011.  Excluding the cash provided 
for design and oversight, this would allow the ROKG to state 
it had moved to 100 percent in-kind construction in three 
years time (a key ROK requirement). 
 
--- Both sides agreed in principle on the wording of 9 USFK 
principles that would guide implementation of the in-kind 
construction program. 
 
--- The new agreement would contain no restrictions on the 
use of SMA funds for implementation of the Land Partnership 
Plan (LPP) (a key DoD requirement) and no date would be 
specified in the agreement for completion of the LPP.  The 
agreement would simply state instead that both the U.S. and 
ROK would make best efforts to accelerate completion of the 
Yongsan Relocation Plan (YRP) and the LPP. 
 
¶2.  (C) At the conclusion of the negotiation it was agreed 
the U.S. side would produce a first draft text of the SMA and 
its Implementing Agreement for approval by both governments. 
The two delegations agreed to meet again December 9-10 in 
Washington, but only if necessary.  If both governments 
approve this ad ref agreement, a signing ceremony will take 
place in Seoul before the end of the year, with U.S. 
Ambassador to Korea Kathleen Stephens signing for the United 
States and the ROK Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan signing for 
the ROK.  END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------------------ 
ROCKY START AT SMALL GROUP BREAKFAST 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C) On November 19, at a ROK-hosted breakfast prior to 
the start of formal negotiations for SMA Round VI, Cho 
Byung-jae, MOFAT Ambassador for Special Measures Agreement, 
rejected the U.S. proposal for incorporating an "off-ramp" 
into the experimental in-kind construction program requested 
by the ROK.  During the course of the breakfast, however, 
Major General Frank Panter, Assistant Chief of Staff, J5, 
USFK, picked up on a misunderstanding by Ambassador Cho that 
the U.S. meant to revert back entirely to a cash-based 
construction program if there were problems with in-kind 
projects.  General Panter and Ambassador Jackson McDonald, 
Senior Advisor for Security Negotiations, clarified that if 
one or more in-kind projects were not working out, but others 
were proceeding smoothly, USFK would only ask to revert to 
cash payment for the troubled projects. 
--------------------------------- 
OPENING PROPOSALS (Day 1 Plenary) 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) An hour later, Ambassador McDonald opened the formal 
negotiations at the Asia Pacific Center for Security Studies 
by listing three topics to be discussed:  1) the overall 
amount of the new SMA agreement; 2) modalities for shifting 
to an in-kind construction program, and; 3) the year for 
completion of the Land Partnership Plan (LPP).  Cho agreed to 
the agenda and began by restating a prior ROK proposal for a 
3-year agreement with a freeze on the ROK contribution in the 
first year, and increases tied to the GDP deflator for years 
two and three.  During the 3-year agreement, Cho pushed for a 
100 percent transition from cash to in-kind construction.  He 
also stressed the need for the U.S. to agree to completion of 
the LPP by no later than 2014. 
 
¶5.  (C) Ambassador McDonald rejected Cho's call for a freeze, 
stating that it was a non-starter because it amounted to a 
real reduction.  McDonald proposed using the ROK Consumer 
Price Index (CPI), rather than the GDP deflator, to determine 
the annual rate of increase in the SMA contribution.  He 
noted that the two sides remained far apart on the overall 
amount and offered to lower the U.S. proposed amount from 
Korean Won 851 billion to Korean Won 835 billion, tied to the 
CPI.  He recalled ROK President Lee Myung-bak's stated desire 
to strengthen the U.S.-ROK alliance and pointed out there was 
no better way for the ROK to demonstrate that than by 
increasing its SMA contribution.  He noted the ROK desire to 
see the LPP completed by 2014 was unrealistic, particularly 
if the ROKG sought to decrease its SMA contribution, as that 
was sure to further slow construction of the new 2nd Infantry 
Division facilities at Pyeongtaek.  Ambassador Cho asked him 
not to put it that way, as it was unfair to say ROK funding 
was responsible for slowing the completion of LPP. 
 
¶6.  (C) Cho and his deputy delegation head, Major 
General-designate Choi Ik-bong, claimed the ROK side had 
already offered the U.S. side many gifts.  Cho in particular 
argued that the U.S. needed to help more with the problem he 
would have selling an SMA agreement to the National Assembly 
if it contained the elements we were seeking.  McDonald 
replied that the U.S. agreement to shift from cash to an 
in-kind contribution for construction was intended to help 
the ROK make its case to the National Assembly, but cautioned 
that Washington would never agree to a freeze. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
STRUCTURE OF IN-KIND PROGRAM (USFK'S 9 PRINCIPLES) 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7.  (C) By mutual consent, the two delegation heads then 
shifted to a discussion of the structuring of the in-kind 
construction program.  Ambassador McDonald reiterated the 
U.S. position that we were willing to agree to a shift from 
cash to in-kind contributions provided the ROK agreed to 
utilize the 9 principles previously outlined by USFK for 
implementation of that program.  The U.S. delegation further 
explained that the phase-in to in-kind construction would 
have to start off more gradually than the ROKG wanted, 
because the contracting process had to begin a year or two in 
advance of actual construction.  Colonel Dan Russell, the 
USFK Engineer, further explained that the in-kind percentage 
in subsequent years could never be more than 88 percent 
because USFK needed 12 percent of the contribution in cash 
for the hiring of project designers and the execution of 
project surveillance (oversight).  The U.S. delegation 
pointed out, however, that if design were not considered part 
of construction, the ROKG could say it was shifting to 100 
percent in-kind construction during the life of the 
agreement. 
 
¶8.  (C) Ambassador Cho agreed with the USFK cash requirement, 
stating that the ROKG just wanted to say that in three years 
it was moving completely to an in-kind system.  Ambassador 
McDonald then suggested a 5-year agreement that would shift 
from 30 percent in-kind construction in the first year to 45 
percent in year two, 60 percent in year three, 75 percent in 
year four, and 88 percent in the final year.  Cho responded 
that a 5-year agreement was still open for discussion, but 
that a 3-year shift to an in-kind system was the ROK bottom 
line. 
 
¶9.  (C) Both sides then went line-by-line through USFK's 9 
principles for the in-kind program. Cho stated that he 
respected the U.S. requirement to set "priorities, standards 
and timelines" as voiced by USFK Commander, General Walter 
Sharp.  McDonald noted that since the last round of 
negotiations, MG Panter and MG Choi had reached agreement on 
6 of the 9 principles, but that further discussion of the 
remaining 3 was required.  On principle 7 - bid savings used 
for future projects - General Choi explained that ROK law 
allowed for bid savings to be applied to other projects, but 
only within the same fiscal year.  General Panter countered 
that he believed exceptions to that rule existed in ROK law, 
and pointed out why principle 7 was related to principle 8 - 
the rollover of unexecuted funds to future years.  The ROK 
delegation replied while the ROKG must make every effort to 
avoid unexecuted funds, they could in fact be rolled over to 
future years, but that Korean law did not allow for bid 
savings to be rolled over as well.  After further discussion 
the two sides reached agreement that bid savings would be 
applied to other projects within the same fiscal year, but 
that if the other project could not be executed that year, 
the funds would be rolled over into the next year.  The MND 
representatives explained that the National Assembly would 
need to be notified in advance, but that such extensions were 
routinely approved.  The ROK side stressed that the key to 
preventing funds from going away was to get the projects 
under signed contracts within the year for which they were 
budgeted. 
 
¶10.  (C) The discussion of principle 9 - the off ramp - took 
place following lunch.  At the ROK's request, Ambassador 
clarified to the plenary that USFK would require some type of 
review of the in-kind program, and that if there were 
significant problems with executing one or more of the 
construction projects USFK would require payment for the 
troubled project in cash so it could hire a construction 
company to complete it.  That off ramp, however, would apply 
only to those projects plagued by serious problems to the 
point where their completion was in jeopardy.  He explained 
that the U.S. was taking a risk in agreeing to shift to 
in-kind, but that at the end of the day what mattered to USFK 
was getting the facilities it needed built on-time and to 
U.S. standards.  He rejected Cho's call for the formation of 
a working group to decide on appropriate language for 
principle 9, noting that similar working-level efforts had 
previously failed to close the significant gap that existed 
between the two sides.  Cho asked Ambassador McDonald to read 
the U.S. proposed language once again.  When he had done so, 
General Choi said, "O.K. MND approves." 
 
-------------------------------------- 
INCLUSION OF THE PRINCIPLES IN THE SMA 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (C) In discussion that followed, Ambassador Cho asked 
whether the U.S. side intended that the 9 principles would be 
included in the language of the SMA, and expressed great 
surprise when he was told that was the case.  Ambassador 
McDonald stated that the U.S. side required that our 
agreement on the principles be legally binding, which meant 
they needed to either be included in the SMA itself or 
attached as an appendix.  Cho claimed it was the first time 
he had heard that, but McDonald countered that Cho had known 
from the beginning that the U.S. had to have a 
government-to-government agreement on the principles in order 
to entertain the ROK request to shift from to in-kind 
construction.  He asked if Cho intended that in-kind would be 
mentioned in the SMA.  When Cho said yes, he stated that it 
was fundamentally fair that the principles for implementation 
of the program be mentioned alongside the in-kind language. 
Cho argued that the SMA IA (which is signed by MND and USFK, 
while the SMA itself is signed by the U.S. Ambassador to 
Korea and the Foreign Minister) was a legally binding 
document.  Pointing out that was not at the same level as the 
SMA itself, McDonald said that if the principles governing 
the in-kind program could not be mentioned in the same 
agreement as the in-kind program itself, the U.S. side would 
drop the offer of a move to in-kind construction and ask that 
 
the SMA revert back to a cash-based system. 
 
¶12.  (C) After considering the U.S. position, General Choi 
suggested that if the principles were to be attached to the 
agreement it would be best to word them as simply as 
possible.  General Panter pointed out that the original USFK 
proposal had done precisely that by rendering each as a 
simple declarative sentence.  Subsequent ROK counterproposals 
had added significantly to the language.  Ambassador Cho 
raised concerns about National Assembly scrutiny.  Embassy 
POL-MIL Chief David Wolff asked if the SMA IA would be 
reported to the National Assembly.  When Cho acknowledged it 
would be, he asked why language MOFAT would share with the 
National Assembly in the IA could not therefore be included 
in, or at least referenced by, the SMA itself.  Ambassador 
McDonald added that it was appropriate to reserve technical 
details for inclusion in the IA, but that the shift to 
in-kind and the principles that would guide it, were more 
than mere technical details.  Rather they represented a 
fundamental shift in the way construction would be carried 
out under the SMA. 
 
----------------------- 
COMPLETION DATE FOR LPP 
----------------------- 
 
¶13.  (C) Shifting to new ground, the ROK side pressed the 
U.S. to agree to stating in the SMA that the Land Partnership 
Plan (LPP) would be completed by 2014, citing intense ROK 
domestic political pressure.  Ambassador McDonald declined, 
pointing out he could not agree to putting a deadline in the 
SMA that we knew we could not meet.  He instead suggested a 
statement that both countries would make best efforts to 
complete LPP without further delay, but stated that was as 
far as he could go since USFK had made it clear that, even if 
all goes well, LPP construction would not be completed until 
2016 at earliest.  MG Panter noted that by pressing to state a 
completion date of 2014 in the SMA, the ROK side was disregarding 
what the Project Management Consortium (PMC) report would say. 
He noted that political considerations, rather than engineering 
ones, appeared to be driving the ROK position. 
 
----------------------------- 
IMPASSE AT U.S.-HOSTED DINNER 
----------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (C) At the end of the first day of negotiations, OSD 
hosted a small group dinner for the ROK delegation.  It ended 
with Ambassador Cho once again pleading for more U.S. 
assistance with which to resolve various ROK domestic 
political concerns.  He sought further considerable 
concessions from the U.S. side while offering no further 
movement on the ROK proposal from the previous round in 
October.  By the end of the evening it appeared the two sides 
had reached an impasse, prompting MOFAT U.S.-ROK Security 
Cooperation Director Kim Young-hyon to question whether there 
would be a second day of negotiations the next morning.  The 
impasse prompted several last ditch phone calls after dinner 
from ROK officials to key members of the U.S. delegation, 
seeking further side bar discussions during which they probed 
and sought clarification on several elements of the U.S. 
position. 
 
¶15.  (C) General Choi later revealed to the Embassy POL-MIL 
Chief that during the night the ROK delegation reported by 
telephone to the Blue House on the status of the negotiations 
and had received clear instructions to make every effort to 
conclude the negotiations the next day.  Ambassador Cho had 
also been empowered by the Blue House with increased 
flexibility with which to do so. 
 
---------------------------- 
BREAKTHROUGH (Day 2 Plenary) 
---------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (C) The next morning (November 20), in a one-on-one 
meeting with Ambassador McDonald, Ambassador Cho floated a 
new ROK offer.  At McDonald's urging he then repeated the 
offer in the plenary session that began at 09:00 a.m. 
Ambassador Cho called for a 5-year agreement.  He dropped his 
demand for a freeze on the contribution in 2009 (something he 
had earlier said he needed owing to ROK economic 
difficulties) and offered instead to increase the 
contribution for each of the five years using an average of 
the CPI and GDP deflator.  That would have resulted in 
increases averaging only about 1.8 percent a year; a real 
term reduction given that inflation in Korea has averaged 
2.82 percent over the past five years.  Cho also called for a 
complete phase in of the in-kind construction program within 
the first three years.  He accepted, however, that would 
include setting aside 12 percent in cash, as requested by 
USFK, for design and oversight.  He stated that the ROK would 
accept the USFK principles and would agree to them in a 
legally binding manner.  He asked that the U.S., in turn, 
agree to the inclusion of the date 2014 in the SMA as the 
date for completion of the LPP. 
 
¶17.  (C) Ambassador McDonald welcomed the improved ROK 
proposal, but rejected the unprecedented use of an average of 
the CPI and GDP deflator for determining the annual increase. 
 He explained once again why the USG could not say LPP would 
be concluded in 2014, when we knew it would take longer than 
that.  He suggested a 4-year phase-in of the in-kind program 
tied to the CPI.  He said there were arguments for and 
against a 5 vs. 3-year agreement, pointing out that the 
content of the agreement was more important than its 
duration.  He acknowledged, however, that a 5-year SMA was 
what the U.S. preferred, provided it was a good agreement. 
He went on to state that the U.S. understood the ROK's 
concerns about an anticipated spike in inflation next year, 
and said we were therefore willing to cap the CPI at 5 
percent.  He also offered to reduce the overall amount of the 
U.S. request to KRW 741.5 billion.  Finally, he informed the 
ROK side that the handling of the principles would need to be 
finalized before the U.S. would agree to sign the SMA. 
 
¶18.  (C) Ambassador Cho said he understood the reasons why 
the transition to in-kind needed to start off at no more than 
30 percent in 2009, but urged that the phase-in be completed 
in three, not four, years.  He agreed that the CPI could be 
applied to the labor portion of the SMA, but argued for use 
of the GDP deflator for construction, stating that was more 
appropriate.  He said 5 percent was too high a cap for the 
CPI and countered with an offer of 3 percent.  General Choi 
voiced approval of the language the U.S. had proposed to 
include in the SMA stating that both governments would make 
best efforts to accelerate completion of LPP, and he added, 
YRP as well.  McDonald replied that YRP was outside his 
portfolio, and primarily under ROK control, but that such a 
statement spoke well for the alliance because we are working 
together. 
 
¶19.  (C) Returning to the CPI cap, McDonald said the U.S. was 
concerned about having the resources needed to meet USFK's 
stationing requirements.  He said that an inflationary cap of 
only 3 percent would create too large a funding gap.  He 
suggested a compromise at 4 percent instead.  He offered that 
the U.S. side would agree in principle to complete the 
in-kind shift in 3 years, but cautioned it might not be 
humanly possible given the workings of construction bids and 
contracting.  He noted that one of the USFK principles 
allowed for an annual review process that would allow both 
sides to consult on how the transition to in-kind was 
progressing. 
 
¶20.  (C) Cho continued to hold out for the GDP deflator, 
stating that there was good precedent for it because it had 
been used in previous SMA agreements.  Ambassador McDonald 
countered that while it had been used in the past, it had 
been added on top of sizable (3-8 percent) real increases in 
the amount of the ROK contribution.  Frustrated, Cho 
complained he wasn't winning anything.  Bob Mounts of the 
SOFA Secretariat noted that, to the contrary, we were on the 
verge of reaching a winning agreement for both sides.  In 
response to Cho's point that inflation averaged only 2.82 
percent over the past five years, Embassy POL-MIL Chief Wolff 
said we weren't concerned about the last five years, but 
rather the next five, and that all indications were that the 
inflation rate would rise before it went back down again. 
For economic reasons, he said a 4 percent cap on CPI was a 
reasonable compromise between the U.S. and ROK positions. 
McDonald agreed, sharply pointing out to Cho that the U.S. 
was not trying to make a profit, but simply wanted to meet 
its stationing requirements. 
 
¶21.  (C) At this point Ambassador Cho stated that he would 
drop his proposal to use the GDP deflator and would take back 
to his government for approval the compromise position of a 
four percent cap on the CPI. 
 
¶22.  (C) McDonald then reviewed the key elements of the 
proposed SMA one by one, obtaining Cho's explicit agreement 
to each element. 
 
¶23. (C) The negotiations adjourned quickly after that, with 
both sides agreeing that preparations of the first draft of 
the SMA and IA would be prepared by David Rathgeber, USFK 
Special Advisor to the Judge Advocate and Commander Tom 
Herold, PM Legal Counsel.  The text would be submitted for 
ROKG consideration as soon thereafter as possible.  It was 
agreed that another round of negotiations was unlikely to be 
needed, but that if it were needed it would be held December 
9-10, just prior to the 20th U.S.-ROK Security Policy 
Initiative Talks (SPI) in Washington. 
 
¶24.  (U) Ambassador McDonald has cleared this message. 
 
STEPHENS 
STEPHENS
</file>