^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL616  |  2008-03-27 09:00  | 기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>KS KN PGOV PREL }}  |
====== 제 목 : 개성공단 추방 조치는 북한의 불만을 드러낸다 ====== 
기밀 SEOUL 000616 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
국방부망 배포
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 03/27/2018 
태그: KS (([Korea (South)])), KN (([Korea (North)])), PGOV (([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL (([External Political Relations])) 
제 목 : 개성공단 추방 조치는 북한의 불만을 드러낸다 
분류자 : 정치 참사관 대리 대사 브라이언 맥피터스((번역주:A/POL Brian McFeeters)) 근거 : 1.4(b,d)
참조하는 전문 [[08seoul623|08SEOUL623]] [[08seoul636|08SEOUL636]]
번역자 : PoirotKr(번역 주:트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org |Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/09/19 11:49//

===== 요약 =====

1. (기밀) 3월 27일 한국 시각으로 오전 한 시에 개성공업지구 상주 남북교류협력협의사무소 직원 11명이 북한에 의해 추방되었다. 통일부에 따르면 개성공업지구 확장 문제를 비핵화와 연계한다는 김하중 통일부 장관의 발언을 추방의 동기로 북한은 언급하였다. 이번 사건은 남한의 새 대통령 이명박이 한층 강경해진 대북 노선을 발표한 이후에 남북한 사이에 긴장의 징후가 드러나는 모습이다. 이명박 대통령은 이번 문제를 논의하기 위해 취임 이후 첫 긴급장관희의를 주재하였다. 청와대 대변인은 이번 사건은 <q>“남북경협 발전에 장애가 되는 유감스러운 일”</q>이라고 말했다.

===== 추방은 북한의 불만 표출 =====

2. (기밀) 김기웅 통일부 통일정책기획관에 따르면 3월 25일 북한이 남북교류협력사무소에 근무하는 직원 11명을 3월 26일 오후 5시까지 퇴거하라고 애초에 기한을 못 박았다. 이에 한국 정부는 북한이 언급한 “추방”의 근거를 북한이 내놓기 전까진 추방을 연기해 달라고 요구했다. 북한관리 당국자가 고집을 피우자 남한 당국 직원 11명은 3월 27일 새벽 1시경에 사무소를 떠났다. 남한 당국은 추방은 개성공업지구의 확장을 비핵화와 연계한다는 김하중 장관의 발언에 대한 대응이라고 추후에 한국 정부는 전해 들었다. (<q>“북한 문제가 계속 타결되지 않고 문제가 남는다면 (개성공단 사업을) 확대하기 어렵다”</q>고 김 장관이 3월 19일 개성공단 입주기업 대표 간담회에서 말했다고 언론은 보도했다.) 통일부 뉴스브리핑에 의하면 한국수출입은행, 대한무역투자진흥공사, 한국무역협회 대표를 비롯해 시설관리요원 등은 경협사무소에 남아 있다.

3. (민감하지만 미분류) 2005년 5월 남북교류협력사무소가 개설되어 개성공단의 공식적인 남북경제협력 협의체 역할을 해왔다. 통일부 브리핑에 의하면, 통일부 직원을 비롯한 기획재정부(전 산업자원부), 대한무역투자진흥공사, 한국무역협회 직원들이 상주한다. 대략 10여 명의 북한 당국자들이 현재 사무실에 근무한다.

4. (민감하지만 미분류) 최근 취임한 이명박 대통령은 두 명의 전임 대통령과는 다르게 대북 강성 정책 기조를 취하고 있다. 3월 26일 통일부 업무보고 자리에서 이명박 대통령이 한 연설에는 북한 정책 노선이 제시되어 있다([[08seoul617|개별 전문]]). 이명박 정부는 북한 인권에 대한 특별 보고관의 특별 권한을 연장하도록 유엔인권이사회에서 투표할 것임을 또한 시사하였다. 이러한 표결 참여는 북한과의 관계에 영향을 끼치지 않도록 과거 두 정부가 이 문제에 대해 기권한 것과는 구분된다. 새 정부가 요사이 북한의 핵 프로그램에 대해 완전하고 정확한 선언을 제공해 달라고 북한에 대해 공개적이고, 반복적으로 촉구해왔다.

===== 한국의 반응 =====

5. (기밀) 이번 사건을 논의하기 위해 긴급장관회의를 소집한 이후에 이동관 청와대 대변인은 추방 조치는 <q>"남북경협 발전에 장애가 되는 유감스러운 일"</q>이라고 말하였다. 대변인은 이 대통령의 대북 강경 발언과 행보는 앞으로도 계속될 것임을 시사하듯 "한국 정부는 대북 실용 정책을 철저하게 고수할 것"이라고 밝혔다. 이날 외교안보정책조정회의에는 김하중 통일장관, 이상희 국방장관, 김성호 국가정보원장, 류우익 대통령실장, 권종락 외교부 제1차관, 박철곤 총리실 국무차장, 김병국 청와대 외교안보수석 등이 참석했다.
===== 개성공단 입주 업체에 끼칠 영향 =====

6. (민감하지만 미분류) 현대 아산 장황빈 상무는 북한 당국자들이 그와 다른 현대 아산 직원에게(현대 아산은 개성공단의 주력업체) 남북교류협력사무소 상주 한국 관리의 추방은 양측 정부 차원의 일이며 민간 업체들은 영향을 받지 않을 것임을 보증하였다고 3월 27일 우리에게 말하였다. 그렇긴 하지만, 장황빈은 추방 조치로 말미암아 기업 활동을 저하되고 더 나아가 중단될까 봐 걱정하고 있다고 말하였다. 이들 기업은 이제 개성공단 출입과 통신이 더 악화할 수 있어 걱정하는 모습이다. 한국 언론은 북한 당국이 개성공단 민간 사업체들을 고립시킬 작정이라고 한국 정부 관리들이 믿고 있다고 보도하였다.

7. (민감하지만 미분류) 장황빈은 현재 100개 이상의 한국 기업이 개성공단 1단계 확장 사업을 목표로 공장을 건립할 기획 단계에 있지만, 해당 일정이 아마도 연기될 것이라고 덧붙였다. 다만 개성공업지구 개발은 그대로 진행될 거라는 북한 당국자의 보장이 있었다는 점과 개성공단의 추가 확장은 비핵화 문제 진척에 달려 있다는 김하중 통일부 장관의 발언은 1단계 사업을 말하는 게 아니라 차후 2단계 확장 사업을 지칭했다는 점도 사실이다. 개성공단 2단계 확장 계획은 부지 임대 확대에 더해 현재 고용된 2만 명을 훌쩍 뛰어넘는 노동력 확대에 필요한 노동자 유입을 수용할 기숙사 건물군 건설을 수반한다. 기숙사 건설 계획은 이 대통령이 비핵화를 강조하고 상호주의에 따른 남북 협력을 주장한 결과로 보류된 상태이다.

===== 6자회담 경제에너지협력에는 지장 없다. =====

8. (기밀) 외교통상부 북핵외교기획단 소속 한 관리는 6자회담 에너지경제 협력 실무그룹 현안을 논의하기 위해 판문점에서 개최하기로 예고된 남북 회담은 예정대로 간다고 말했다. 동 외교부 관리는 북한이 개성공단과 비핵화를 연계하는 것에 대해 달가워하지 않겠지만, (6자 회담) 에너지경제 협력 실무그룹을 통해 제공되는 대북 원조와 비핵화 연계성 문제는 6자 회담 내에서 정립된 바 있으며 개성공단 관리 추방 사건과 관련해 영향을 받을 공산이 크지 않다고 언급하였다.

===== 논평 =====

9. (기밀) 북한의 레토릭은 최근 갈수록 한국에 대해 비판이 커지고 있지만, 이번 개성공단 추방 사건은 개성공단 확대와 비핵화 진척을 연계한다는 남한 정부의 조치에 대해 노골적인 불만을 표시한 것이다. 우리는 한국 정부가 앞서 밝힌 확고한 연계 방침을 변경하지 않는다는 점을 시사하면서도 정제된 초기 대응을 했다고 판단한다. 6자 회담 에너지경제 협력 실무그룹 회담 지속과 더불어 북한이 개인 사업자를 안심시킨 점에서 북한의 행동이 (남북을 잇는) 가교를 불태우지 않으면서도 북한의 불만을 토로하기 위해 고도로 계산된 행동이라는 점을 보여준다. 논평 끝.
스탠튼
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 바깥 고리 =====
  - [[http://www.fnnews.com/view?ra=Sent0801m_View&corp=fnnews&arcid=00000921269894&cDateYear=2008&cDateMonth=03&cDateDay=27&mfn=f|靑 “개성공단 사태, 실용적 입장하에 대응”]] //파이넨셜뉴스//
  - [[http://news.khan.co.kr/kh_news/khan_art_view.html?artid=201301071659371&code=910302|김홍균, 김기웅 등 인수위 파견 외교안보부처 공무원 확정]] //경향신문//

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL616.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000616 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/27/2018 
TAGS: KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PREL [External Political Relations] 
SUBJECT: KIC EXPULSION SIGNALS DPRK DISCONTENT 
 
Classified By: A/POL Brian McFeeters. Reasons 1.4(b/d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) On March 27 at 1 a.m. Seoul time, 11 South Korean 
officials stationed at the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC) 
were expelled by the DPRK.  According to the South Korean 
Ministry of Unification (MOU), the DPRK cited Unification 
Minister Kim Ha-joong's comments linking denuclearization 
with expansion of the KIC as the motive for the expulsions. 
The incident was an indicator of emerging tensions between 
North and South Korea since new South Korean President Lee 
Myung-bak announced a firmer line towards the DPRK.  After 
President Lee held his first emergency Cabinet meeting today 
to discuss the incident, the President's Spokesman said that 
the act was "regrettable" and "could pose an obstacle to 
sustained development of inter-Korean relations."  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Expulsions Indicate DPRK Discontent 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) According to Kim Ki-ong, MOU Director for Development 
and Planning, on March 25 the DPRK set an initial deadline 
for the 11 officials working at the KIC Inter-Korean 
Exchanges and Cooperation Consultation Office to depart by 5 
p.m. on March 26.  The ROK asked for a delay until the DPRK 
provided a reason for the "expulsions," which was the word 
used by the North Koreans.  Upon the DPRK officials' 
insistence, the 11 ROKG officials left at 1 a.m. on March 27. 
 The ROKG was later told that the expulsions were a response 
to Unification Minister Kim's comments linking the expansion 
of the KIC with denuclearization. ("It will be difficult to 
expand (the KIC) if the issue of North Korea's nuclear 
programs remains unsolved," Kim told KIC business owners on 
March 19, according to press reports.)  According to an MOU 
press briefing, five employees, including representatives of 
the Korea Export-Import Bank, Korea Trade-Investment 
Promotion Agency (KOTRA), and the Korea International Trade 
Association (KITA), along with maintenance staff, remained at 
the KIC office. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The KIC Inter-Korean Exchanges and Cooperation 
Consultation Office opened in October 2005 to serve as an 
official inter-Korean economic cooperation consultative body 
in Kaesong.  Officials from MOU, the Ministry of Knowledge 
and Economy (formerly the Ministry of Commerce, Industry, and 
Energy), KOTRA, and KITA were stationed at this office. 
Approximately ten DPRK officials currently work at the 
office, according to an MOU briefing. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Recently-inaugurated President Lee Myung-bak has 
taken a tougher policy line towards North Korea than his two 
most recent predecessors.  On March 26, Lee gave a policy 
speech at the MOU that outlined his North Korea policy 
(septel).  His government has also indicated that it would 
vote in the U.N. Human Rights Council to continue the special 
mandate of the Special Rapporteur for North Korean Human 
Rights, unlike the past two governments, which abstained on 
the issue lest it affect engagement with North Korea.  The 
new government has also made repeated public calls in recent 
days urging the DPRK to provide a complete and correct 
declaration of its nuclear programs. 
 
------------ 
ROK Reaction 
------------ 
 
¶5. (C) Following an emergency Cabinet meeting to discuss the 
incident, the President's Spokesman, Lee Dong-kwan, said that 
the expulsions were "regrettable" and "could pose an obstacle 
to sustained development of inter-Korean relations."  The 
spokesman indicated that President Lee's sharper rhetoric and 
actions toward North Korea would likely continue, saying that 
the ROKG would "thoroughly stick to its 'pragmatic policy'" 
on North Korea.  Unification Minister Kim Ha-joong, Defense 
Minister Lee Sang-hee, Intelligence Chief Kim Sung-ho, Chief 
of Staff Ryu Woo-ik, Vice Foreign Minister Kwon Jong-rak, 
Deputy Chief of the Prime Minister's Office Park Chul-gon, 
and National Security Advisor Kim Byung-kook attended the 
meeting. 
------------------------------ 
Impact on ROK Companies at KIC 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) Hyundai Asan Senior Vice President Jang Whan-bin 
told us on March 27 that North Korean officials had assured 
him and others from his company, the lead developer of the 
KIC, that the expulsion of the ROK officials was at the 
government-to-government level and that private business 
should not be affected.  Nevertheless, Jang said, companies 
were worried that the expulsions would slow and possibly 
freeze business operations at the KIC.  These companies were 
concerned that entry, exit and communications at the KIC 
could now become more difficult.  South Korean press reported 
that ROKG officials also believed that the DPRK intended to 
cut off private business at the KIC. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Jang added that some of the more than 100 ROK 
companies currently in the planning stages to build factories 
for Phase I of KIC expansion would probably delay their 
timetables, despite assurances from DPRK officials that the 
development should proceed, and despite the fact that MOU 
Minister Kim's comments about further KIC expansion depending 
on progress on denuclearization referred not to Phase I but a 
later Phase II expansion.  Phase II of the KIC's expansion 
plan entails leasing more land and building a ring of 
dormitory buildings around the KIC to house the influx of 
workers needed to expand the KIC's labor force beyond the 
20,000 workers currently employed.  This plan has been put on 
hold as a result of President Lee's calls for reciprocity in 
North-South cooperation and the emphasis on denuclearization. 
 
 
----------------- 
No Impact on EEWG 
----------------- 
 
¶8. (C) An official in MOFAT's North Korean Nuclear Affairs 
division said a planned ROK-DPRK bilateral meeting at 
Panmunjom to discuss issues in the Energy and Economy Working 
Group (EEWG) of the Six Party Talks had begun according to 
schedule.  The official noted that that the DPRK was likely 
unhappy with the new linkage between the KIC and 
denuclearization, but that the linkage between 
denuclearization and assistance provided through the EEWG had 
been well established in the Six Party Talks and was not 
likely to be affected by events related to the KIC expulsions. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (C) While North Korea's rhetoric had grown more critical 
of the ROK in recent days, the expulsions were the first 
overt expression of frustration with the new South Korean 
government's linkage between progress on denuclearization and 
KIC expansion.  We read the ROKG's initial reaction as 
measured, without any indication that it will modify the 
firmly stated linkage.  The DPRK's assurances to private 
business owners, along with the continuation of the EEWG 
meeting, indicate that the North Korean action was calibrated 
to express North Korea's discontent without burning any 
bridges.  END COMMENT. 
STANTON
</file>