^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL2429  |  2008-12-18 06:53  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>MARR PREL PGOV KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 한미 방위비 분담금 특별협정 발의 ======
미 분 류 SEOUL 002429 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
행정명령 12958: 해당없음((N/A))
태그: MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 한미 방위비 분담금 특별협정 발의
참조: SECSTATE 131917 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/08/23 20:11//

1. (민감하지만비분류)  참조 문서에 따라, 조셉 윤 공관차석 대리는 조병제 외교통상부 대사와 함께 12월 17일 수요일에 방위비 분담금 특별협정을 발의하였고, 수반된 외교문서를 위한 작성된 본문에 합의하였다. 발의된 협정의 스캔 된 복사본은 동아태/한국과와 주한미군에 다 같이 보내졌다.

2. (민감하지만비분류) 발의된 문서의 본문은 아래와 같다.:

===== 방위비 분담 특별협의 본문 시작 =====

아메리카합중국과 대한민국 간의 상호방위조약 제4조에 의한 시설과 구역 및 대한민국에서의 합중국군대의 지위에 관한 협정 제5조에 대한 특별조치에 관한 대한민국과 미합중국 간의 협정 (방위비분담특별협정)
  * 제 1 조  대한민국은 이 협정의 유효기간 동안 주한미군지위협정 제5조와 관련된 특별조치로서 주한미군의 주둔에 관련되는 경비의 일부를 부담한다. 대한민국의 지원분은 인건비 분담, 군수비용 분담 및 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 항목으로 구성된다. 이 협정의 이행은 당사국 관계당국 간의 별도의 이행약정에 따른다.

  * 제 2 조  이 협정은 2009년부터 2013년까지의 대한민국의 지원분을 결정한다. 2009년의 대한민국의 지원분은 7,600억원이다.2010년, 2011년, 2012년, 2013년 지원분은 전년도 지원분에 대한민국 통계청이 발표한 물가상승률(소비자물가지수)만큼의 증가금액을 합산하여 결정되며, 2010년 지원분은 2008년도 물가상승률을, 2011년 지원분은 2009년도 물가상승률을, 2012년 지원분은 2010년도 물가상승률을, 2013년 지원분은 2011년도 물가상승률을 적용하여 결정된다. 다만, 해당 연도에 적용되는 물가상승률은 4%를 초과하지 아니한다.

  * 제 3 조  인건비 분담은 현금지원이며, 군수비용 분담은 현물지원이다. 대한민국이 지원하는 건설은 현금지원과 현물지원으로 구성된다. 대한민국이 지원하는 건설은 2009년부터 점진적으로 현물지원으로 전환되며, 2011년부터는 시설의 설계 및 시공감리와 관련된 비용을 제외하고는 전면 현물로 지원된다. 만일 연도 말에 대한민국이 지원하는 건설의 미집행 현물지원분이 남아있을 경우, 동 지원분은 다음 연도로 이월된다. 대한민국이 지원하는 건설의 지침과 상세 절차 등 세부 이행사항은 당사국 관계당국 간의 별도의 문서에 따른다.

  * 각 연도의 인건비 분담금은 3회씩 균등 분할하여 해당 연도의 4월 1일이나 그 이전, 6월 1일이나 그 이전, 그리고 8월 1일이나 그 이전에 지급된다.대한민국이 지원하는 건설의 전면 현물화 이전에는 대한민국이 지원하는 건설의 현금지원분 은 2회씩 균등 분할하여 해당 사업연도의 3월 1일 및 다음 연도의 3월 1일에 각각 50퍼센트씩 지급된다. 대한민국이 지원하는 건설의 전면 현물화 이후에는 시설의 설계 및 시공감리 관련 비용은 해당 사업연도의 3월 1일에 지급된다.

  * 제 4 조  현물지원의 일부로 제공되는 모든 물자·보급품·장비 및 용역은 대한민국의 조세로부터 면제되거나 납세 후 금액을 기준으로 제공된다. 대한민국 정부가 조달하는 그러한 물자·보급품·장비 및 용역은 개별소비세 및 부가가치세가 면제된다. 부가가치세의 경우에는 영세율을 적용한다. 그러한 물자·보급품·장비 및 용역에 대하여 조세가 부과되는 경우 그러한 조세지불은 비용분담재원으로부터 이루어지지 아니한다.

  * 제 5 조  이 협정은 당사국이 이 협정의 발효를 위하여 필요한 그들 각자의 국내법적 절차를 완료하였다는 서면통고를 교환하는 날에 발효하며, 2013년 12월 31일까지 유효하다.
  * 다만, 이 협정의 종료는 이 협정에 근거하여 합의된 절차를 거쳐 각 연도에 선정되었으나 협정 종료시 완전하게 이행되지 않은 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업을 계속 이행해 나가는 데 영향을 미치지 아니한다.

  * 제 6 조  당사국은 주한미군지위협정 제28조제1항에 규정된 합동위원회나 당사국이 임명하는 대표로 구성되는 방위비분담공동위원회를 통하여 이 협정에 관한 모든 문제를 협의할 수 있다.

  * 제 7 조  이 협정은 상호합의에 의하여 서면으로 개정되거나 수정될 수 있다. 이 협정의 개정이나 수정은 당사국이 그러한 개정이나 수정을 위한 그들 각자의 국내법적 요건이 충족되었다는 서면통고를 교환하는 날에 발효한다.
이상의 증거로, 아래 서명자는 이 목적을 위하여 정당하게 권한을 위임받아 이 협정에 서명하였다.
2008년 12월 그 날 서울에서 동등하게 정본인 한국어 및 영어로 각 2부를 작성하였다.

미합중국을 대표하여 을 대표하여

===== 외교 문서 본문 시작 =====

주한미군지위협정 제5조에 대한 특별조치에 관한 협정 중 대한민국이 지원하는 건설의 현물지원에 관한 교환각서 (방위비분담)

==== (미국측 제안각서) ====

No.XXX
주한미국대사관은 대한민국 외교통상부에 경의를 표하며, 2008년 12월 XX일에 서명된 「대한민국과 미합중국 간의 상호방위조약 제4조에 의한 시설과 구역 및 대한민국에서의 합중국군대의 지위에 관한 협정 제5조에 대한 특별조치에 관한 대한민국과 미합중국간의 협정」(이하 "방위비분담특별협정"이라 한다)에 관하여 양국 정부대표 간에 최근 진행된 논의에 대하여 언급하는 영광을 가지며, 현물건설지원이 다음 지침에 따라 이행될 것을 제안하는 바입니다.
  - 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업은 방위비분담특별협정에 의거한다.
  - 미합중국은 대한민국과의 협의 후 군사적 필요에 근거하여 건설 사업을 선정하고 사업의 우선순위를 정한다.
  - 대한민국은 설계 과정에서 식별되고 발전된 일정에 따라 건설 계약을 체결하고 건설 사업들을 시행한다.
  - 미합중국이 설계를 담당한다.
  - 미합중국은 설계 시방서 및 수용 가능한 사업자 목록을 대한민국에 제공한다. 사업자는 미 육군 극동공병단이 사전에 선별한 사업자 목록에 포함된 대한민국 업체 중에서 선정된다.
  - 설계 및 시공감리는 총 사업비의 평균 12%를 차지하며 대한민국이 현금으로 지급한다.
  - 입찰계약에서 절약되는 금액은 향후 사업에 사용된다.
  - 미합중국과 대한민국은 미집행 지원분이 발생하지 않도록 적절한 절차를 수립한다. 만일 연도 말에 미집행 지원분이 발생하는 경우, 이 지원분은 다음 연도로 이월된다.
  - 현물지원 절차가 작동하고 있다는 것을 확인하기 위하여 연례 점검체계를 수립한다. 특정 사업에서 현물지원 절차가 작동하고 있지 않다고 판단되는 경우, 대한민국과 미합중국은 문제를 해결하기 위하여 협의하고, 현금 제공을 포함하여 이 사업을 완료하기 위하여 적절한 조치를 취한다.제공을 포함하여 이 사업을 완료하기 위하여 적절한 조치를 취한다.
대한민국은 2009년에는 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업의 30%를 현물로 제공하며, 2010년에는 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업의 60%를 현물로 제공하고, 2011년부터 2013년까지는 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업의 88%를 현물로 제공한다.
앞의 사항이 대한민국에 의하여 수락될 수 있다면, 주한미국대사관은 이 공한과 귀부의 회답공한이 양국 정부간의 합의를 구성하고, 방위비분담특별협정의 발효일과 동일한 일자에 발효될 것을 제안하는 영광을 가지는 바입니다.

주한미국대사관은 이 기회에 대한민국 외교통상부에 최대의 경의를 거듭 표하는 바입니다.
2008년 12월 XX일, 서울

(대한민국측 회답각서)
OGT-8
대한민국 외교통상부는 주한미국대사관에 경의를 표하며, 2008년 X월 XX일자 귀 대사관 021호 공한을 다음과 같이 언급하는 영광을 가지는 바입니다.
주한미국대사관은 대한민국 외교통상부에 경의를 표하며, 2008년 12월 15일에 서명된 「대한민국과 미합중국 간의 상호방위조약 제4조에 의한 시설과 구역 및 대한민국에서의 합중국군대의 지위에 관한 협정 제5조에 대한 특별조치에 관한 대한민국과 미합중국간의 협정」(이하 "방위비분담특별협정"이라 한다)에 관하여 양국 정부대표 간에 최근 진행된 논의에 대하여 언급하는 영광을 가지며, 현물건설지원이 다음 지침에 따라 이행될 것을 제안하는 바입니다.
  - 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업은 방위비분담특별협정에 의거한다.
  - 미합중국은 대한민국과의 협의 후 군사적 필요에 근거하여 건설 사업을 선정하고 사업의 우선순위를 정한다.
  - 대한민국은 설계 과정에서 식별되고 발전된 일정에 따라 건설 계약을 체결하고 건설 사업들을 시행한다.
  - 미합중국이 설계를 담당한다.
  - 미합중국은 설계 시방서 및 수용 가능한 사업자 목록을 대한민국에 제공한다. 사업자는 미 육군 극동공병단이 사전에 선별한 사업자 목록에 포함된 대한민국 업체 중에서 선정된다.
  - 설계 및 시공감리는 총 사업비의 평균 12%를 차지하며 대한민국이 현금으로 지급한다.
  - 입찰계약에서 절약되는 금액은 향후 사업에 사용된다.
  - 미합중국과 대한민국은 미집행 지원분이 발생하지 않도록 적절한 절차를 수립한다. 만일 연도 말에 미집행 지원분이 발생하는 경우, 이 지원분은 다음 연도로 이월된다.
  - 현물지원 절차가 작동하고 있다는 것을 확인하기 위하여 연례 점검체계를 수립한다. 특정 사업에서 현물지원 절차가 작동하고 있지 않다고 판단되는 경우, 대한민국과 미합중국은 문제를 해결하기 위하여 협의하고, 현금 제공을 포함하여 이 사업을 완료하기 위하여 적절한 조치를 취한다.
대한민국은 2009년에는 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업의 30%를 현물로 제공하며, 2010년에는 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업의 60%를 현물로 제공하고, 2011년부터 2013년까지는 대한민국이 지원하는 건설 사업의 88%를 현물로 제공한다.
앞의 사항이 대한민국에 의하여 수락될 수 있다면, 주한미국대사관은 이 공한과 귀부의 회답공한이 양국 정부간의 합의를 구성하고, 방위비분담특별협정의 발효일과 동일한 일자에 발효될 것을 제안하는 영광을 가지는 바입니다.

주한미국대사관은 이 기회에 대한민국 외교통상부에 최대의 경의를 거듭 표하는 바입니다.
2008년 12월 XX일, 서울

대한민국 외교통상부는 귀 대사관의 공한에 명시된 제안들이 대한민국에 의하여 수락될 수 있고, 귀 대사관의 공한과 이 회답 공한이 양국 정부 간의 합의를 구성하는 것으로 간주되며, 방위비분담특별협정의 발효일과 동일한 일자에 발효하는 데 동의한다는 것을 통보하는 영광을 가지는 바입니다.

대한민국 외교통상부는 이 기회에 주한미국대사관에 최대의 경의를 거듭 표하는 바입니다.
//스티븐스//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/12/08seoul2429|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
<WRAP center round info 90%>
본 전문은 2009년 1월 15일에 서명하게 되는 방위비분담특별협정의 내용을 미국 측에서 그 내용을 발의하여 한국측에 전달한 내용이다. 실재 15일에 서명된 내용과 내용을 비교해봤지만, XX로 불특정의 날짜 등을 제외하곤 다른 내용은 없으며, 약간의 맞춤법 교정이 있을 뿐이다. 그러므로 해당 내용의 특정 숫자를 제외하고 [[http://www.law.go.kr/trtySc.do?menuId=4&query=방위비분담|외통부의 번역본을]] 모두 그대로 사용했음을 밝혀둔다. 서두의 몇 문단만 제가 번역한 내용이다.
</WRAP>

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL2429.rtf>
UNCLAS SEOUL 002429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], PREL [External Political Relations], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: U.S.-ROK SMA AGREEMENT INITIALED 
 
REF: SECSTATE 131917 
 
¶1. (SBU) In accordance with reftel, A/DCM Joseph Yun and 
MOFAT Ambassador Cho Byung-jae initialed the SMA Agreement on 
Wednesday, December 17, and agreed on the text for the 
accompanying diplomatic note.  A scanned copy of the 
initialed agreement has been sent to both EAP/K and USFK. 
 
 2. (SBU) The initialed text of the documents follows: 
 
------------------------- 
Begin SMA Agreement Text. 
------------------------- 
 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
CONCERNING SPECIAL MEASURES RELATING TO 
ARTICLE V OF THE AGREEMENT UNDER ARTICLE IV 
OF THE MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY BETWEEN 
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
REGARDING FACILITIES AND AREAS AND THE STATUS OF UNITED 
STATES ARMED FORCES IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
 
 
The Republic of Korea and the United States of America 
(hereinafter referred to as "the Parties") have agreed to 
take the following special measures relating to Article V of 
the Agreement under Article IV of the Mutual Defense Treaty 
between the Republic of Korea and the United States of 
America Regarding Facilities and Areas and the Status of 
United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Korea 
(hereinafter referred to as "the Status of Forces Agreement") 
signed at Seoul on July 9, 1966, as amended, which sets forth 
the principles on the sharing of expenditures incident to the 
maintenance of the United States Armed Forces in Korea, in 
recognition of the goal of a strong and mutual commitment to 
the Republic of Korea - United States of America alliance. 
 
Article I 
 
The Republic of Korea shall bear, for the duration of this 
Agreement, as a special measure relating to Article V of the 
Status of Forces Agreement, a part of the expenditures 
associated with the stationing of the United States Armed 
Forces in Korea.  The contribution of the Republic of Korea 
shall be categorized into Labor Cost Sharing, Logistics Cost 
Sharing, and Republic of Korea Funded Construction. 
Implementation of this Agreement shall be in accordance with 
a separate implementation arrangement between the concerned 
authorities of the Parties. 
 
Article II 
 
This Agreement shall determine the contribution of the 
Republic of Korea for 2009 through 2013. The contribution of 
the Republic of Korea for 2009 is 760 billion Korean Won. The 
2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013 contributions shall be determined 
by increasing the contribution of the previous year by the 
inflation rate (Consumer Price Index) published by the Korea 
National Statistical Office using 2008's rate for the 2010 
contribution, 2009's rate for 2011, 2010's rate for 2012, and 
2011's rate for 2013.  Further, the inflation rate used for 
any given year shall not exceed four percent. 
 
Article III 
 
The Labor Cost Sharing contributions shall consist of cash 
support and the Logistics Cost Sharing contribution in-kind 
support. Republic of Korea Funded Construction shall consist 
of cash contributions and in-kind contributions. Republic of 
Korea Funded Construction shall be gradually shifted to the 
in-kind contributions from 2009, and the contributions of 
Republic of Korea Funded Construction shall be completely 
in-kind starting from 2011 except expenses associated with 
design and construction oversight of facilities. If 
unexecuted in-kind contributions of Republic of Korea Funded 
Construction remain at the end of the year, those 
contributions shall roll over to the next year. 
Implementation details of the Republic of Korea Funded 
Construction, such as guiding principles and specific 
procedures, shall be in accordance with separate documents 
between the concerned authorities of the Parties. 
 
Each year's Labor Cost Sharing payments shall be made in 
three equal payments on or before April 1, June 1, and August 
1 of that year. Republic of Korea Funded Construction 
contributions provided in cash shall be paid, before the 
completion of the shift, in two equal payments with 50 
percent paid on March 1 of the program year and 50 percent 
paid one year later (March 1). After the completion of the 
shift, expenses associated with design and construction 
oversight of facilities shall be paid on March 1 of each 
program year. 
 
Article IV 
 
All materials, supplies, equipment and services provided as 
part of the in-kind contribution shall be exempt from 
Republic of Korea taxes, or provided on an after-tax basis. 
Such materials, supplies, equipment and services procured by 
the Government of the Republic of Korea shall be exempt from 
special excise taxes and value added taxes.  In the case of 
value added taxes, the zero rate shall be applied. If taxes 
are levied against any such materials, supplies, equipment or 
services, payment of such taxes shall not be made from 
cost-sharing funding. 
 
Article V 
 
This Agreement shall enter into force upon the date of the 
exchange of written notification by the Parties that their 
respective domestic legal procedures necessary for the entry 
into force of this Agreement have been completed, and shall 
remain in force until December 31, 2013. 
 
The termination of this Agreement shall not affect the 
carrying out of any Republic of Korea Funded Construction 
projects which are selected every year in accordance with the 
agreed procedures under this Agreement, and not fully 
executed on or after the termination of this Agreement. 
 
Article VI 
 
The Parties may consult on all matters regarding this 
Agreement through the Joint Committee provided for in 
Paragraph 1 of Article XXVIII of the Status of Forces 
Agreement, or through the Joint Cost-Sharing Committee, which 
is composed of representatives appointed by the Parties. 
 
Article VII 
 
This Agreement may be revised or amended in writing by mutual 
consent. The revision or amendment of this Agreement shall 
enter into force on the date when the Parties exchange 
written notifications that their domestic legal requirements 
for such revision or amendment have been fulfilled. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorized for the 
purpose, have signed this Agreement. 
 
DONE at Seoul this    day of December 2008, in duplicate, in 
the Korean and English languages, both texts being equally 
authentic. 
 
 
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
FOR THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
End Text. 
 
-------------------------- 
Begin Diplomatic Note Text 
-------------------------- 
 
No. XXX 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of 
the Republic of Korea and has the honor to refer to recent 
discussions between representatives of our two governments 
regarding the Agreement between the Republic of Korea and the 
United States of America concerning special measures relating 
to Article V of the agreement under Article IV of the Mutual 
Defense Treaty between the Republic of Korea and the United 
States of America regarding facilities and areas and the 
Status of United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Korea 
signed on December XX, 2008 (hereinafter referred to as "the 
SMA") and proposes that the in-kind construction 
contributions be implemented in accordance with the following 
principles: 
 
(1) The Republic of Korea Funded Construction remains under 
the SMA. 
 
(2) The United States of America, after consultation with the 
Republic of Korea, selects and prioritizes construction 
projects based on military needs. 
 
(3) The Republic of Korea awards construction contracts and 
implements construction projects in accordance with the 
corresponding timeline as identified and developed during 
project design. 
(4) The United States is responsible for project design. 
 
(5) The United States provides design specifications and a 
list of acceptable contractors to the Republic of Korea. 
Contractors shall be Republic of Korea companies selected 
from the United States Army Corps of Engineers Far East 
District's Pre-Qualified contractor list. 
 
(6) Design and Construction oversight, which averages twelve 
(12) percent of the total project costs, is paid by the 
Republic of Korea in cash. 
 
(7) Any bid savings shall be used for future projects. 
 
(8) The United States and the Republic of Korea shall 
establish proper procedures to prevent unexecuted 
contributions. In the unlikely event that unexecuted 
contributions exist at the end of the year, those 
contributions shall roll over to the next year. 
 
(9) An annual review system shall be established to ensure 
"in-kind" procedures are working. For the project or projects 
where it is determined "in-kind" procedures are not working, 
the Republic of Korea and the United States shall consult in 
an effort to resolve the problem, and take proper actions to 
complete the project or projects including providing cash to 
the United States. 
 
Thirty (30) percent of the 2009 Republic of Korea Funded 
Construction contribution shall be provided by the Republic 
of Korea in-kind, sixty (60) percent of the 2010 Republic of 
Korea Funded Construction contribution shall be provided by 
the Republic of Korea in-kind, and from 2011 to 2013 
eighty-eight (88) percent of the Republic of Korea Funded 
Construction contribution shall be provided by the Republic 
of Korea in-kind. 
 
If the foregoing is acceptable to the Republic of Korea, the 
Embassy has the honor to propose that this note, together 
with the Ministry's reply, shall constitute an agreement 
between the two governments, which shall enter into force at 
the same time as the SMA. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
Seoul, December XX, 2008. 
 
 
 
Reply Note: 
OSJ 2008- 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of 
Korea presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United 
States of America and has the honor to refer to the Embassy's 
note (number) dated XXX, 2008, which reads as follows: 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of 
the Republic of Korea and has the honor to refer to recent 
discussions between representatives of our two governments 
regarding the Agreement between the Republic of Korea and the 
United States of America concerning special measures relating 
to Article V of the agreement under Article IV of the Mutual 
Defense Treaty between the Republic of Korea and the United 
States of America regarding facilities and areas and the 
Status of United States Armed Forces in the Republic of Korea 
signed on December XX, 2008 (hereinafter referred to as "the 
SMA") and proposes that the in-kind construction 
contributions be implemented in accordance with the following 
principles: 
 
(1) The Republic of Korea Funded Construction remains under 
the SMA. 
 
(2) The United States of America, after consultation with the 
Republic of Korea, selects and prioritizes construction 
projects based on military needs. 
 
(3) The Republic of Korea awards construction contracts and 
implements construction projects in accordance with the 
corresponding timeline as identified and developed during 
project design. 
 
(4) The United States is responsible for project design. 
 
(5) The United States provides design specifications and a 
list of acceptable contractors to the Republic of Korea. 
Contractors shall be Republic of Korea companies selected 
from the United States Army Corps of Engineers Far East 
District's Pre-Qualified contractor list. 
 
(6) Design and Construction oversight, which averages twelve 
(12) percent of the total project costs, is paid by the 
Republic of Korea in cash. 
 
(7) Any bid savings shall be used for future projects. 
 
(8) The United States and the Republic of Korea shall 
establish proper procedures to prevent unexecuted 
contributions. In the unlikely event that unexecuted 
contributions exist at the end of the year, those 
contributions shall roll over to the next year. 
 
(9) An annual review system shall be established to ensure 
"in-kind" procedures are working. For the project or projects 
where it is determined "in-kind" procedures are not working, 
the Republic of Korea and the United States shall consult in 
an effort to resolve the problem, and take proper actions to 
complete the project or projects including providing cash to 
the United States. 
 
Thirty (30) percent of the 2009 Republic of Korea Funded 
Construction contribution shall be provided by the Republic 
of Korea in-kind, sixty (60) percent of the 2010 Republic of 
Korea Funded Construction contribution shall be provided by 
the Republic of Korea in-kind, and from 2011 to 2013 
eighty-eight (88) percent of the Republic of Korea Funded 
Construction contribution shall be provided by the Republic 
of Korea in-kind. 
 
If the foregoing is acceptable to the Republic of Korea, the 
Embassy has the honor to propose that this note, together 
with the Ministry's reply, shall constitute an agreement 
between the two governments, which shall enter into force at 
the same time as the SMA. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
Seoul, December XX, 2008. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of 
Korea has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United 
States of America that the proposals set forth in the 
Embassy's note are acceptable to the Republic of Korea and to 
agree that the Embassy's note and this note shall be regarded 
as constituting an agreement between the two governments, 
which shall enter into force at the same time as the SMA. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade avails itself of 
the opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the United States 
of America the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
Seoul, December xx, 2008 
 
End text. 
STEPHENS
</file>