^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL455  |  2008-03-07 12:04  |  비밀(2급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>MARR PGOV PINS PREL KN KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 이상희 신임 국방 장관, 공통의 이해관계를 정립하는 것이 한미동맹 강화의 열쇠 ======
비 밀 SEOUL 000455 
국방부망 배포((번역 주:  SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution)) 
국방부망 배포
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 05/07/2018 
태그: MARR (([Military and Defense Arrangements])), PGOV (([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PINS (([National Security])), PREL (([External Political Relations])), KN (([Korea (North)])), KS (([Korea (South)])) 
제 목: 이상희 신임 국방 장관, 공통의 이해관계를 정립하는 것이 한미동맹 강화의 열쇠
분류자: 대사 알랙산더 버쉬바우.  근거 1.4 (b/d).
번역자: PoirotKr (번역 주: 트위터 사용자이름) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/10/11 02:43// 

===== 요점 =====

1. (기밀) 요약: 3월 7일 버시바우 대사는 신임 이상희 국방장관과 공식적인 첫 회동을 했다. 그들은 한미동맹의 전략적 중요성과 미래 역할에 초점을 맞추어 한 시간 가량 논의하였다.
  * 버시바우 대사는 이 장관의 국방장관 내정 소식을 축하하였고, 그가 보유한 광범위한 군사 및 정책 역량에 대해 칭찬했다.
 
  * 이 장관은 자신이 조금 전에 게이츠 국방장관과 통화를 했다며 한미 동맹이 지니는 중요한 역할인 미래 역내 안보를 강조하기 위해 4월에 있을 한미 정상회담을 잘 활용하는 것이 중요하다고 합의했다고 전했다.

  * 이상희는 한미동맹이 세계 평화에 더욱 기여하고 역내 안보 문제에 집중하기 위해서는 북한 문제를 초월해야만 한다는 자신의 견해를 전달하였다.

  * 버시바우 대사는 전 세계에 걸친 미군의 군사 방어태세 변혁이(해외미군재배치계획) 핵심이 되는 최우선 국방 과제라고 강조하면서, 주한미군에 영향을 미치게 될 그러한 변화에 대해 전폭적인 지지를 요청하였다. 그는 역내 및 전 세계 안보 문제에 대처하는 한미 동맹의 역할을 확대하기 위해 한국의 협조를 희망한다고 했다.

  * 이 장관은 양국 대통령이 한목소리를 낼 수 있다면 한미 동맹이 진정 공고해 질 거라면서 이해관계의 교집합을 발전시키는 한미 동맹이 중요하다고 강조하였다.

  * 이상희는 많은 사람이 미군의 한국 주둔이 영구적이어야 한다는 점을 깨닫지 못하고 있다며 미래 한미 안보 전략의 구현을 위해서도 주한 미군의 안정적인 한반도 주둔이 중요할 거라고 지적하였다. 그는 미국이 일본을 관리하는 가운데 중국의 부상을 견제하기 위해 한국 주둔을 활용할 것을 충고하였다.

  * 이 장관은 미 대사, 주한미군 사령관, 외교통상부 장관, 국방부 장관이 함께하는 빅4 대화를 부활하자고 제안하였다.

  * 별첨 논의에서 이상희 장관은 전시 작전통제권 이양 문제에 관한 한국 정부의 입장은 합의한 대로 추진하되 한미 양국이 계속적으로 안보 상황과 구현 과정에 대해 신중히 평가한다는 것이라고 분명히 밝혔다. 요점 끝

2. (기밀) 3월 7일 버시바우 대사는 한국의 신임 국방부 장관 이상희의 사무실을 처음으로 방문하였다. 두 사람은 미래 한미동맹의 역할과 전략적 중요성에 초점을 맞추어 한 시간가량 논의하였다. 버시바우 대사는 그가 한 주 앞당겨 국무위원이 된 것을 축하하면서, 한미 안보 정책 입안을 주도하는 역할로 복귀한 그를 환영하였다. 이상희는 그가 한국 합참의장이었을 당시 함께한 예전 회동을 상기하면서 그가 버시바우 대사의 워싱턴 국제관계대학원 연설에 참석했었다고 말했다. 버시바우 대사는 이상희의 풍부한 군사 및 정책 역량을 칭찬하면서, 대사가 생각하기에 훌륭한 분이 한미동맹을 책임지게 된 것으로 생각된다고 말했다. 이상희는 그가 동맹 관리 측면에는 매우 익숙하지만, 그 밖의 새로운 동향에 대해선 부분적으로만 숙지하고 있다며, 아직은 새 한국 정부가 방향을 설정하는 과정이라고 겸손하게 대답하였다.

===== 게이츠 국방장관과의 전화 통화 =====

3. (기밀) 이상희 장관은 자신이 미 국방장관 게이츠와 아침 일찍 전화 통화를 했다고 버시바우 대사에게 말하였다. 그는 한미 동맹이 역내 안보에서 중요한 역할을 수행하고 있다는 사실을 강조하기 위해 4월 한미 정상회담을 활용하는 문제에 대해 견해를 같이하였다. 역내 안보 역할은 과거와 마찬가지로 미래에도 필수적인 역할이 될 것이다. 이상희는 한미동맹이 세계 평화에 더욱 기여하고 역내 안보 문제에 집중하기 위해서는 북한 문제를 초월해야만 한다는 자신의 견해를 전달하였다. 그는 국군통수권자와 국방 장관이 동시에 국외로 나갈 수 없도록 하는 안보 관례 때문에 자신이 캠프 데이비드 정상회담에 이명박 대통령을 수행할 수 없을 거라고 게이츠 국방장관에게 설명했다고 말했다. 그러나 그가 미 국방 장관과 회동하여 더 깊은 논의를 계속하기 위해 머지않아 워싱턴을 방문하길 희망한다고 말했다.
===== 동맹 변혁: 전진 야! =====

4. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 세계 방어태세 검토에 따른 전 세계에 걸친 군사 변혁을 최우선 국방 과제로 고려하고 있으며, 주한미군의 변혁도 그중에 중요한 부분이라고 강조하면서 말문을 열었다. 추가 군사 책임의 한국 이양과 함께 용산기지 이전사업과 연합토지관리계획을 통한 한미동맹 변혁은 출발이 좋다고 지적하였다. 대사는 이 장관이 해당 사업을 마무리하도록 확실히 지원해 달라고 요청하였다.

5. (비밀) 주석: 그들은 공식 회의를 마친 이후 막간 별첨 논의에서 이상희 장관은 전시 작전통제권 이양 문제에 관한 한국 정부의 입장은 그가 인사청문회 석상에서 말했듯이 (한미 양국이) 합의한 대로 2012년 4월 17일 작통권 이양을 추진하되 한미 양국이 계속해서 안보 상황과 구현 과정에 대해 신중히 평가한다는 것이라고 분명히 밝혔다. 버시바우 대사는 이상희의 발언이 미국 측의 입장을 잘 반영하고 있다고 언급하면서 그에게 감사하다고 했다. 주석 끝.

===== 전 세계 역할 확대 비전 =====

6. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 역내 및 전 세계 안보 문제에 대처하는 한미 동맹의 역할을 정의하고 확대하기 위해 한국의 협조를 희망하며, 덧붙여 적대적인 대북 관계의 평화적인 해결을 뛰어넘어 한반도 안보를 위한 미군의 지속적인 주둔을 옹호한다고 말을 이었다. 이어진 종합적인 논의에서 이 장관은 한반도의 미래를 예측하고 어떻게 양국 공통의 이해관계를 계속적으로 발전시킬지 상호 이해의 폭을 넓히는 것이 중요하다고 제창하였다. 우리가 군사적 성격의 한미동맹을 초월해 상호 이득이 되는 한층 전략적인 접근을 채택하는 한미동맹으로 격상하는 데 힘써야 한다고 이상희는 촉구했다. 그는 4월 한미 정상회담에서 양국 공통의 이해관계에 초점을 맞출 걸로 기대한다고 말하였다. 그는 만일 양국 지도자가 자국민과 입법부를 상대로 공통의 이해관계에 대해 한목소리를 낼 수 있다면 한미 동맹은 진정 공고해 질 거라고 덧붙였다. 역사는 편협한 이해관계는 긴장과 불화만 야기할 뿐임을 가르쳐 줬다고 이상희는 말했다. 공통의 이해관계를 정립하는 것이 공고한 한미동맹의 열쇠인 까닭은 상호 이해를 추구하면 신뢰가 쌓이고 그 신뢰를 바탕으로 공통의 목표를 더 잘 추구할 수 있게 된다.

7. (기밀) 한미 양국의 모든 국민이 오늘날 한국의 현실과 현재와 미래 한미동맹에 대해 견해의 폭이 넓고 다양하다는 점에 이 장관과 버시바우 대사는 견해를 같이하였다. 일부는 한국이 아직도 한국전쟁 중이라고 간주한다. 또 다른 사람들은 매사를 아직도 10년 전이나 20년 전 시절로 바라본다. 이치에 밝은 사람들은 오늘의 상황을 사실 그대로 이해하고 있다. 인식의 다중성이 상존하기 때문에, 양국이 자국민을 교육해서 우리 서로를 있는 그대로 바라볼 수 있도록 하는 것이 중요하다고 이상희는 말했다. 포괄적인 한미동맹 과업에 대해 명확한 대중의 이해를 증진하는 것이 한미동맹의 안위에 중요하다고 그와 버시바우 대사는 견해를 같이하였다. 두 사람 모두 4월 캠프 데이비드 정상회담이 양국 공통의 이해관계에 대해 의논하고 공동의 가치를 강조하고 한미 동맹의 중대성에 대해 양국 국민의 인식을 제고하는 훌륭한 기회라고 지적하였다. 한편으로는 한반도 안보를 위한 미국의 주둔이 단순히 북한의 위협을 억제하는 차원을 넘어 장기적인 가치가 있음을 직시하도록 도와야 한다.

===== 한미 정상 선언 =====

8. (기밀) (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 예전 한미 고위급 회담을 회고하면서 4월 한미 정상회담을 목표로 (국방 관계를 비롯해 경제와 대민 협력을 총괄하는) 총론적인 한미동맹 비전을 개발하자고 권고하였다. 그것을 그 뒤 이 장관이 추후 봄에 게이츠 국방장관을 만나서 자세히 다룰 수 있을 것이다. 이상희는 향후 한미 양국 정부 교체와는 관계없이 양국 정부의 길잡이가 될 전체적인 미래 한미 관계의 골격을 확립하는 것이 중요하다고 말하며 동의하였다.

===== 전략적 논의 =====

9. (기밀) 이 장관은 지난해 미국서 시간을 보내는 동안에 많은 미국인과 대화를 나누면서 한반도의 전략적인 중요성에 대한 이해가 충분하지 않다는 점을 알게 되었다고 말하였다. 그는 역내 안보를 한층 강화하고 유지하기 위해선 미일/한미동맹 양대 북동아시아 동맹을 지속할 필요가 있다고 믿었다. 그가 생각할 때 미국이 중국의 부상에 대해 가장 우려하지만, 미국 정부는 북동아시아를 단지 일본과 중국에만 국한해 보는 경향이 있다. 반면에 미군의 영구적인 한반도 주둔의 중요성을 무시하고 있다. 그는 미국의 한국 주둔이 영구적이어야 함을 많은 미국인이 깨닫지 못하고 있다고 말했다. 또한, 그는 일본과 중국을 대결 구도로 몰아가려는 자들에 대해 역내에 해가 된다며 주의를 당부하였다. 미국이 일본을 관리하면서도 중국의 부상을 견제하도록 미군의 한반도 주둔을 잘 활용하는 것이 현명하다. 만일 한국이 통일된다면 같은 이유로 미국의 존재의 중요성이 실제로 무한정 커질 것이라고 그는 느낀다. 이런 논리는 미국 정부의 기득권이 역내 평화와 안정에 있다는 점에 더해 역내 권력의 균형자로서 거둔 성과물, 다시 말해 평화와 안정을 계속적으로 조성한다는 이해에 기초한 것이라고 이상희는 설명하였다.

10. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 중국이 부상하고 일본이 일종의 평범한 권력이 됨에 따라 역내 힘의 균형을 유지하는데 한반도 상에 존재하는 미국의 역할이 중요하다는 점에 견해를 같이하였다. 그는 한미동맹과 미군 주둔은 제대로 평가받고 있지 않다는 점에 동의하면서 새 한국 정부의 출범이 한미 동맹의 장기적인 사명에 대해 더 많은 생각을 하게 하는 기회를 제공했다고 했다. 우리는 그러한 한미동맹 논의 상대로 이 장관과 같은 열의에 찬 파트너와(동지) 함께하게 되어 기쁘게 생각한다. 이상희는 주한 미군의 안정된 주둔이 한미 미래 안보 전략을 구현하는 데 중요하다고 확인하였다. 그는 미국 정부의 전 세계에 걸친 미군 변혁(해외미군재배치계획) 완성의 중요성을 이해한다면서 한국이 그러한 미국의 노력을 용산기지 이전사업과 연합토지관리계획을 통해 미래 지향적인 미군 병력의 안정적인 주둔을 장려하는 분위기를 조성함으로써 일조하고 있다고 지적하였다. 이를 위해 그는 주한미군 사령관 비.비.벨 준장의 미군 복무기간 정상화 추진은 (동반자 없는 일 년 복무에서 가족을 동반한 3년 복무로 바꾸는) 아주 훌륭한 생각이라고 말했다. 버시바우 대사는 이 장관의 성원에 감사하며, 그와 벨 사령관은 (미군 복무기간 정상화 추진에 대해) 확신이 서지 못한 미 의회 사람들 교육에 그가 자원한다면 환영할 거라고 했다.
===== 빅4 회담 재소집 요청 =====

11. (기밀) 이상희 장관은 과거 2+2나 빅4 회담이 (버시바우 대사, 주한미군 사령관, 외교통상부 장관, 그리고 국방장관이 포함된다.) 유용했음을 환기하면서 재도입을 제안했다. 버시바우 대사는 잠정적인 조치라면 그 생각을 지지한다며 첫 번째 회의를 그의 공관에서 주재하자고 제안하였지만, 이 장관이 외교통상부 유명환 장관과 이를 논의했는지 물었다. 이 장관은 아직 안 했지만, 조만간 얘기할 작정이라고 대답하였다.

12. (기밀) 주석: 외교통상부 고위급 연락선(정보원)은 외교부가 그런 모임에 반대한다고 우리에게 말했다. 왜냐면 북한과의 긴장이 고조되는 시점에는 적절하지만, 오늘 당장 그런 모임을 재결성하는 것은 그리 유용하지 않기 때문이다. 주석 끝.

13. (기밀) 버시바우 대사는 만일 그런 회담이 열리게 된다면 미래 한미동맹의 진화와 관련해 난상 토론의 수단으로 회담을 활용하거나 한미동맹 현안과 관련 각자의 공보 메시지를 조율하는 수단으로 활용하는 것이 적절할 수 있다고 제안하였다.

===== 국방색에서 회색으로 바꿈 =====

14. (기밀) 한국 육군 준장을 역임한 이상희 장관은 군 복무 중에 훌륭한 미국 친구를 많이 두었다며 지금은 훈장을 때고 신사복을 입은 만큼 미국의 문민 지도자들과도 친분을 쌓아가길 고대한다고 말하며 회동을 마무리 지었다. 그는 새 한국 정부의 직업윤리는 하루를 일찍 시작하고 밤늦게까지 근무하는 거라고 말했다. 더구나 그는 4월 9일 총선을 앞두고 이 대통령 소속당이 실질적인 원내 다수를 확보하도록 일조하느라 특히 바쁘다. 그렇긴 하지만, 이상희는 한미동맹의 미래와 전반적인 한미 관계 개선에 관한 양자 논의를 더욱 확대하기 위해 미 대사와 함께하는 정기적인 회동을 원한다고 선언하였다.
버시바우
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL455.rtf>
S E C R E T SEOUL 000455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/07/2018 
TAGS: MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PINS [National Security], PREL [External Political Relations], KN [Korea (North)], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: NEW DEFENSE MINISTER SAYS DEFINING COMMON INTEREST 
IS KEY TO STRONGER ALLIANCE 
 
Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: The Ambassador held his first official 
meeting on March 7 with Lee Sang-hee, the new ROK Minister of 
National Defense.  They engaged in a one-hour discussion that 
focused on the strategic importance and future role of the 
U.S.-ROK Alliance. 
 
-- The Ambassador congratulated Minster Lee on his 
appointment and praised his extensive military and policy 
credentials. 
 
-- Minister Lee related that he had just spoken by telephone 
with Secretary Gates and that they had agreed it was 
important to utilize the U.S.-ROK presidential summit in 
April to highlight that the alliance has an important role to 
play in the future security of the region. 
 
-- Lee conveyed his own view that the alliance must transcend 
the North Korea issue to focus on regional security concerns 
and further contribute to world peace. 
 
-- The Ambassador stressed that the USG considers global 
transformation of its military posture to be a key defense 
priority and asked for Minister Lee's full support for the 
changes that impact U.S. Forces Korea.  He voiced the U.S. 
desire to work with the ROK to expand the role of the 
alliance in addressing regional and global security concerns. 
 
-- Minster Lee stressed the importance to the alliance of 
developing a common set of interests, saying that if the two 
presidents can voice a clear consensus the alliance will 
truly stand strong. 
 
-- Lee said many failed to realize that the U.S. presence in 
Korea should be permanent and pointed out that the stable 
stationing of U.S. forces on the peninsula would be important 
to implementing our future bilateral security strategy.  He 
advised the U.S. utilize its presence in Korea to check the 
rise of China while managing Japan as well. 
 
-- The Minister proposed resurrecting the Big 4 dialogue 
between the Ambassador, the USFK Commander, the MOFAT 
Minister and the Minister of National Defense. 
 
-- In a side discussion, Lee clearly stated that the ROKG 
position on the transfer of wartime operational control 
(OPCON) was that it should move forward as agreed while the 
U.S. and ROK would continue to carefully assess progress on 
implementation and the security situation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) On March 7, the Ambassador paid his first office call 
on Lee Sang-hee, the new ROK Minister of National Defense. 
The two engaged in an hour-long discussion that focused on 
the strategic importance and future role of the U.S.-ROK 
Alliance.  The Ambassador congratulated Lee who had assumed 
his new cabinet position one week earlier and welcomed him 
back to a leading role in formulating U.S.-ROK security 
policy.  Lee recalled their previous meetings when he was ROK 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and said he had 
attended a speech the Ambassador had given at SAIS in 
Washington.  The Ambassador praised Lee's extensive military 
and policy credentials, commenting that he thought the 
alliance was in very good hands.  Lee modestly replied that 
while he was very familiar with aspects of alliance 
management, he was only partially acquainted with other newer 
developments, and was still in the process of determining the 
direction of the new ROK administration. 
 
--------------------------- 
TELCON WITH SECRETARY GATES 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Minister Lee told the Ambassador that he had spoken 
by telephone earlier in the morning with Secretary of Defense 
Gates.  He said they had agreed on utilizing the April 
U.S.-ROK presidential summit to highlight the fact that the 
alliance has an important role to play in the security of the 
region -- a role that will be as vital in the future as it 
 
has been in the past.  Lee conveyed his view that the 
alliance must transcend the North Korea issue to focus on 
regional security concerns and to contribute further to world 
peace.  He said he had explained to Secretary Gates that he 
would be unable to accompany President Lee Myung-bak to Camp 
David for the summit owing to a security practice that does 
note allow both the commander-in-chief and defense minister 
to be outside the country at the same time.  However, he said 
he hoped to visit Washington soon after to meet with the 
SECDEF and continue their discussion in more depth. 
 
------------------------------------- 
ALLIANCE TRANSFORMATION:  FORWARD HO! 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) The Ambassador began by stressing that the U.S. 
Government considers its worldwide transformation under the 
Global Posture Review to be a key defense priority, and that 
the transformation of U.S. Forces Korea (USFK) was an 
important part of that.  He noted that a good start had been 
made on implementing alliance transformation through the 
Yongsan Relocation Plan and Land Partnership Plan together 
with the transfer of additional military responsibilities to 
the ROK.  He asked that Minister Lee firmly support their 
completion. 
 
¶5.  (S) NOTE: In a brief side discussion after their formal 
meeting had ended, Lee stated that the ROKG position on the 
transfer of wartime operational control (OPCON) was as he had 
stated in his confirmation hearing: that it should continue 
to move forward, as agreed, to execution of the transfer on 
April 17, 2012, while the U.S. and ROK would continue to 
assess progress on implementation and the security situation 
along the way.  The Ambassador thanked him, noting that his 
statement reflected the U.S. position as well.  END NOTE. 
 
--------------------------------- 
VISION OF AN EXPANDED GLOBAL ROLE 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) The Ambassador went on to stress the U.S. desire to 
work with the ROK to define and expand the global role of the 
alliance in addressing other regional and global security 
concerns, and to advocate a continued U.S. security presence 
on the Korean Peninsula beyond the peaceful settlement of 
hostilities with the DPRK.  During the comprehensive 
discussion that followed, Minster Lee echoed the importance 
of envisioning the future of the Korean Peninsula and 
developing a common bilateral understanding of how the 
alliance could continue to advance our shared interests.  We 
should work to upgrade the alliance from one that is military 
in nature to one that transcends that by adopting a more 
strategic approach for achieving our mutual interest, Lee 
urged.  He said he expected that our two presidents would 
focus on U.S.-ROK common interests during their April summit 
meeting.  He added that if the two leaders voice a clear 
consensus about our common interests to our respective 
publics and legislatures, the alliance will truly stand 
strong.  History has taught us that narrow interests only 
lead to tension and discord, Lee said.  Defining our common 
interests is the key to a strong alliance because the pursuit 
of mutual interests builds trust and trust is the foundation 
from which we can better pursue our common goals. 
 
¶7.  (C) Minster Lee and the Ambassador agreed that both the 
American and Korean publics held widely varying views of the 
reality of Korea today and the role of the alliance both now 
and in the future.  Some still regarded Korea as it was 
during the Korean War.  Others still see things as they were 
ten or twenty years ago.  The better informed understand the 
situation as it truly is today.  Because there is such a 
multitude of perceptions, it is important that we educate our 
publics so that we can see each other as we truly are, Lee 
said.  He and the Ambassador agreed that it would be 
important to the well-being of the alliance to foster a 
clearer public understanding of its broader mission.  They 
both pointed to the April summit meeting at Camp David as an 
excellent opportunity to talk about our common interests, 
highlight our shared values, and reacquaint our publics with 
 
the great importance of the alliance, while also helping them 
see that the U.S. security presence on the Korean Peninsula 
has long-term value beyond simply deterring the North Korean 
threat. 
 
------------------ 
SUMMIT DECLARATION 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  (C) Reflecting previous high-level U.S.-ROK discussions, 
the Ambassador recommended a general alliance vision 
statement be developed for the April summit (to encompass 
economic and people-to-people cooperation as well as defense 
links) which Minister Lee could then follow up on in more 
detail when he meets with Secretary Gates later in the 
spring.  Lee agreed, saying he thought it was important that 
the summit establish a future framework for the overall 
U.S.-ROK relationship that would guide our two governments 
regardless of future changes in U.S. or ROK administrations. 
 
-------------------- 
STRATEGIC DISCUSSION 
-------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) Minister Lee related that he had talked with many 
Americans during the time he spent in the United States, last 
year, and he had found that the strategic importance of the 
Korean Peninsula was not fully understood.  He believed that 
the continuation of both Northeast Asian alliances - 
U.S.-Japan and U.S.-ROK - was necessary to maintain and 
further enhance the security of the region.  He thought the 
United States was most concerned about the rise of China, but 
that Washington tended to view Northeast Asia only in terms 
of Japan and China, while ignoring the importance of 
maintaining a permanent U.S. military presence on the Korean 
Peninsula.  He said many Americans failed to realize that the 
U.S. presence in Korea should be permanent and cautioned 
against those who sought to pit Japan against China, saying 
that would be harmful to the region.  It would be wiser for 
the United States to utilize its presence on the Korean 
Peninsula to check the rise of China while managing Japan as 
well, Lee continued.  For the same reason, he felt that if 
Korea were to be reunified, the importance of the U.S. 
presence would actually increase exponentially.  This logic 
was based on an understanding that the USG had a vested 
interest in peace and stability in the region and would 
continue to foster that outcome by serving as a balancing 
power in the region, Lee explained. 
 
¶10.  (C) The Ambassador agreed that the U.S. presence in the 
Korean Peninsula played an important role in helping to 
maintain equilibrium in the region as China rises and Japan 
becomes more of a normal power.  He agreed that the ROK-U.S. 
alliance and the U.S. troop presence were underappreciated 
and suggested that the start of a new Korean administration 
offered an opportunity for the U.S. and ROK to think more 
about the longer-term mission of the alliance.  We were glad 
to have Minister Lee as a committed partner in that 
discussion.  Lee acknowledged that the stable stationing of 
U.S. forces in Korea would be important to implementing our 
future bilateral security strategy.  Indicating that he 
appreciated the importance to the USG of completing its 
global military transformation, Lee pointed out that the ROK 
was aiding that effort through YRP and LPP by creating an 
atmosphere that would encourage the stable positioning of 
U.S. forces for the future.  To that end, he said he thought 
that USFK Commander General B.B. Bell's push for 
normalization of tours of duty for U.S. servicemembers (from 
one-year unaccompanied tours to three-year tours with 
families) was an excellent idea.  The Ambassador thanked 
Minister Lee for his support, commenting that he and General 
Bell would welcome his assistance in educating those in our 
Congress who remain unconvinced. 
 
------------------------------ 
CALL TO RECONVENE THE BIG FOUR 
------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  (C) Minister Lee recalled the usefulness of the 2-plus-2 
 
or Big 4 dialogue of the past (which included the Ambassador, 
USFK Commander, MOFAT Minister and MND Minister) and proposed 
that they be reinstituted.  The ambassador said he supported 
the idea, at least on an ad hoc basis, and offered to host 
the first one at his residence, but asked if Lee had 
discussed it with Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan.  Lee 
replied that he had yet to do so but that he intended to talk 
to him about it very soon. 
 
¶12.  (C) NOTE: Lee may find that a hard sell as high-level 
MOFAT contacts have told us that they oppose the meetings 
because, while they were appropriate in times of heightened 
tension with the North, it would not be particularly useful 
to reestablish them today.  END NOTE. 
 
¶13.  (C) The Ambassador suggested that if such a meeting were 
held it might be appropriate to use it as a means of 
brainstorming on the future evolution of the alliance, as 
well as providing a means to coordinate our respective public 
affairs messages about alliance issues. 
 
----------------------- 
SWAPPING GRAY FOR GREEN 
----------------------- 
 
¶14.  (C) A former general in the ROK Army, Lee Sang-hee 
concluded the meeting by saying that the had made many great 
American friends while he was still in uniform, but that now 
that he had put away his medals and was wearing a business 
suit he looked forward to building equally close relations 
with American civilian leaders.  He said the work ethic of 
the new ROK administration was to start early and burn the 
midnight oil.  Furthermore, he was particularly busy in the 
lead-up to the April 9 elections helping his president gain a 
working majority in the National Assembly.  Nevertheless, Lee 
declared that he wanted to meet with the U.S. Ambassador on a 
regular basis so as to further broaden their bilateral 
discussion on the future of the U.S.-ROK Alliance and the 
betterment of the U.S.-ROK relations as a whole. 
VERSHBOW
</file>