====== 제 목 : 이명박의 핵심 보좌진, 신임 대통령이 새로운 대한민국을 이끌 거라 믿어 ======

작성일 : 2008년 1월 18일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000112 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KN KS
SUBJECT: KEY LEE MYUNG-BAK ADVISERS BELIEVE NEW PRESIDENT 
WILL USHER IN A NEW KOREA 


Classified By: CDA Bill Stanton. Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 

요약: 1월 17일 대사와 오찬에서 이명박의 참모인 최시중과 현인택은 새 대통령 당선자 아래서 한국의 미래에 대해 낙관론을 피력했다. 오랜 기간 이명박의 정치적 멘토이자 가장 가까운 측근 가운데 한 사람인 최시중은 한국 건국 60주년인 올해는 한국의 새로운 출발과 미국 한국 관계의 새로운 시작을 기념하는 한 해가 될 것이라고 말했다. 
그는 대통령 이명박과 함게 한국이 많은 진전을 보게 될 것이며 미국 정부가 신뢰할 수 있는 좀 더 현대적인 국가가 될 것이라고 예측했다. 현인택은 대북 정책에서 큰 차이는 원조에 대한 선결 조건으로 이명박이 주창해 온 비핵화가 될 것이라고 말했다. 두 자문가들은 통일부를 없애는 내용의 정부 구조 개편 안은 국회를 통과할 것이고, 그 결과 대북 정책은 좀 더 잘 조율될 것이라고 말했다. 최는 이명박이 거의 동물 같은 본능으로 새로운 상황에 적응할 수 있기 때문에 성공적인 대통령이 될 것이라고 예측했다. 또한 그의 재빠른 반응은 좋은 정책으로 반영돼 나타날 것이라고 말했다. 최는 또 한나라당은 4월 9일 총선 전에 분열되지 않으며, 의석을 많이 얻으면 총선 후에도 그럴 것이라고 예측했다. 현은 이명박의 워싱턴 방문은 미국 소고기에 대해 한국 시장이 개방된 뒤에 이뤄질 것이라고 말했다. 

¶1. (C) Summary: At lunch with the Ambassador on January 17, 
Lee Myung-bak advisers Choi Shee-joong and Hyun In-taek 
expressed optimism about Korea's future under President-elect 
Lee Myung-bak's leadership. Choi, a long-time political 
mentor to Lee and one his closest advisers, said that this 
year -- the sixtieth anniversary of the founding of the ROK 
-- would mark a new beginning for Korea and a new beginning 
for the U.S.-ROK relationship. He predicted that, with Lee 
as President, Korea would see many improvements, becoming a 
more modern country that the U.S. Government could trust. 
Hyun said that the big difference in policy toward North 
Korea would be Lee's insistence on denuclearization as a 
precondition for aid. Both advisers expressed confidence 
that the proposed cabinet restructuring plan that would 
eliminate the Ministry of Unification (MOU) would pass the 
National Assembly and that, as a result, policy toward North 
Korea would be better coordinated. 
Choi predicted that Lee 
would be a successful president because he could adapt to new 
situations with an almost animal-like instinct, and his quick 
reactions would be reflected in good policies. Choi also 
predicted that the Grand National Party (GNP) would not split 
before the April 9 elections, but might do so after the 
elections if it won too many seats. Hyun said Lee 
Myung-bak's visit to Washington would come after the Korean 
market was open to U.S. beef. End Summary. 

----------- 
Visit to DC 
----------- 
워싱턴 방문
대통령 당선자 이명박의 핵심 외교 자문가인 현인택 교수는 점심을 하면서 대사에게 언제 미국 방문을 모색할지 이명박이 결정하지 않았다면 그러나 4월 둘째 주나 셋째 주 쪽으로 기울고 있다고 말했다. 현은 캠프 데이비드 방문이 이상적이라고 말했다. 수석 고문이자 이명박의 오랜 정치적 멘토 가운데 한 사람인 최시중은 4월 9일 총선 때문에 미국 방문을 계획할 때 국내 정치 관심사들이 고려돼야 한다고 말했다. 대사는 4월 방문이 더 나을 것이라며, 그렇게 되면 한국에 미국 소고기 수입이 재개된 뒤 이명박이 미국을 방문할 수 있게 되는 것이라고 말했다. 현은 소고기의 정치적 민감성에 대해 이명박이 이해하고 있다며 그러므로 이명박의 방미는 한국 시장이 미국 소고기에 개방된 뒤 이뤄질 것이라고 말했다.
¶2. (C) President-elect Lee Myung-bak's key foreign policy 
advisor Professor Hyun In-taek told the Ambassador over lunch 
that Lee had not decided when he would seek a visit to the 
U.S. was but was leaning toward the second or third week in 
April. Hyun noted a visit to Camp David would be ideal. 
Senior advisor Choi Shee-joong, one of Lee's oldest political 
mentors, noted that, because of the April 9 National Assembly 
election, domestic political concerns had to be weighed when 
scheduling the visit. The Ambassador said April might be 
better so Lee could visit the U.S. after U.S. beef imports to 
Korea had resumed. Hyun said Lee understood the political 
sensitivity of the beef issue and therefore Lee's visit would 
come after the Korean market was open to U.S. beef. 
대통령직 인수위 특사인 정몽준의 1월 21~23일 미국 방문에 대해 대사는 정이 부시 대통령을 만나지 않을 것이라고 말했다. 최와 현 두 사람은 이런 소식을 흘려 듣는 듯 했다. 최시중은 외교부와 이태식 주미 대사가 그 같은 회동을 성사시키기 위해 아주 열심히 노력하고 있는 걸 알고 있다고 말했다. 대사는 이태식 대사의 노력이 비생산적이 될 것이라는 암시를 주고, 이명박의 첫 번째 방미를 위해 에너지를 아껴야 할 것이라고 제안했다. 최와 현은 이명박과 부시 대통령의 첫 번째 성공적인 정상회담을 준비하는 것이 더 중요하다는데 동의했다.


¶3. (C) Commenting on the January 21-23 visit to Washington 
of Presidential Transition Committee envoy Chung Mong-joon to 
the U.S., the Ambassador said that Chung would not likely 
meet President Bush. Both Choi and Hyun seemed to take this 
news in stride, and Choi said that he knew how hard the 
foreign ministry and Ambassador Lee Tae-sik in Washington 
were working to secure such a meeting. The Ambassador hinted 
that Ambassador Lee's efforts might be counterproductive and 
suggested they save their energy for preparations for Lee 
Myung-bak's first visit. Choi and Hyun agreed that preparing 
a successful first summit between Lee and President Bush was 
more important. 

최시중은 이명박이 매우 오픈돼 있는 사람이며 부시 대통령과 보조를 맞출 준비가 돼 있다고 말했다. 이명박은 노무현 대통령보다 다양한 국제 경험이 있고 보다 폭넓은 인생 경험이 있기 때문에 한미 관계와 부시 대통령과 개인적 관계를 증진시킬 수 있을 것이라고 말했다. 첫 번째 정상회담에서 대사는 북한에 대한 공통의 입장을 표시하고, 한미 FTA에 대해 공동지지를 표시하는 것뿐만이 아니라 우리의 군사 동맹에 대한 공동의 노력을 나타내기를 희망했다. 정상회담은 새롭고 좀 더 현대적이며 균형 잡힌 한미 관계를 출범시킬 수 있는 기회가 될 수 있다. 현은 정상회담이 국제 문제에서 좀 국제적인 역할을 하는데 노력하는 좀 더 현대적이고 좀 대등한 파트너로 미국이 한국을 인식하고 있다는 메시지를 보낼 수 있다고 말했다. 
¶4. (C) Choi said that Lee was very open and ready to "click" 
with President Bush. Since Lee had a wide range of 
international experience and broader life experience than 
President Roh, Lee would be in a position to improve 
Korea-U.S. relations and personal relations with President 
Bush. At the first summit, the Ambassador said, we would 
hope to convey our shared commitment to our military alliance 
as well as express a common position on North Korea and 
signal our joint support for the KORUS FTA. The summit could 
be a chance to launch a new, more modern and balanced 
relationship between Korea and the U.S. Hyun said the summit 
could send the message that the U.S. recognized ROK as a 
modern and more equal partner committed to playing a more 
global role in international affairs. 

------- 
New Era 
------- 
새 시대
최시중은 수 차례에 걸쳐 2008년은 한국 건국 60주년이 되는 해이며 60은 한국에서 이정표가 되는 숫자라고 언급했다. 그러므로 올해는 한국과 미국-한국 관계에 있어 향후 60년 나아갈 길을 정하는 새로운 출발점이 될 수 있다고 최는 말했다. 미국 한국 관계에 대한 이명박의 최근 발언들은 미국과 한국이 차이를 넘어, 새로운 관계와 파트너십을 형성하는 기회를 만들었다. 최는 다가올 변화에서 미국은 지난 60년을 생각하고, 향후 60년을 내다보기를 희망한다고 말했다. 
¶5. (C) Choi remarked several times that 2008 marked the 
sixtieth anniversary of the founding of the Republic of Korea 
and that 60 was a milestone age in Korea. Therefore, he 

said, this year could mark a new beginning for Korea and for 
U.S.-ROK relations that would set the course for the next 60 
years. Lee's recent statements on the U.S.-ROK relationship 
had created an opportunity for the U.S. and the ROK to go 
beyond their differences and create a new relationship and 
new partnership. Choi said he hoped that in this upcoming 
transformation the U.S. would keep in mind the past 60 years 
and also look to the next 60 years. 

--------------------- 
Cabinet Restructuring 
--------------------- 
정부 구조 개편
최는 인수위 팀의 제안이 정부 부처의 숫자를 18개에서 13개로 줄이는 것이 될 것이라고 예상하고 통일부 폐지가 국회에서 큰 반대에 부딪히지 않을 것이라고 말했다. 통일부는 한반도의 특수한 상황을 반영하는 특수한 정부부처였다. 그러나 현재 계획 아래서도 남북 관계의 중요성은 줄어들지 않을 것이다. 대신 외교부 내부에서 일이 진행되면서, 북 남 관계는 다른 외교 정책들과 조율될 것이다. 또 남북 문제가 모든 부처로부터 협조를 필요로 하기 때문에 사실상 이런 외교부로의 통합은 북 남 지원에 대한 통일부의 독점을 깨뜨릴 것이다. 또 다른 부처들이 좀 더 결집된 정책에 공헌하도록 할 것이라고 최시중은 말했다. 
¶6. (C) Choi said that he expected the transition team 
proposal to reduce the number of ministries from 18 to 13 and 
eliminate the Ministry of Unification (MOU) would not face 
major opposition in the National Assembly. The MOU was a 
special ministry reflecting the unique situation on the 
Peninsula but under the current plan, the importance of 
South-North relations would not decrease. Instead, working 
within the foreign ministry, North-South relations would be 
coordinated with other foreign policy. Also, since 
North-South issues required assistance from all ministries, 
the merger would in fact break MOU's monopoly on North-South 
assistance and allow other ministries to contribute to a more 
integrated policy, Choi said. 

----------- 
North Korea 
----------- 
북한 

현인택은 이명박의 북한 정책 핵심은 비핵화를 확실히 하는 것이며 북한이 미국 달러 기준으로 1인당 소득 3000달러 수준에 이르도록 돕는 것이라고 말했다. 모든 북한 사람들이 TV와 냉장고를 소유하고, 많은 북한 사람들이 차를 갖게 될 때만이 북한 사람들을 변화를 요구하게 될 것이다. 그러므로 이명박은 북한의 변화를 강요하지 않을 것이다. 그러나 북한이 개방이 가져올 진전과 지원을 원하는지를 결정하도록 허용할 것이다. 현의 말에 화답하듯, 최시중은 목표는 북한 비핵화이며 점진적인 변화를 독려하는 것이라고 말했다. 비핵화 없이는 아무 것도 가능하지 않으며, 이 같은 바탕 위에서 이명박의 입장은 미국 입장과 동일하다고 최시중은 말했다. 미국 긴밀히 협력하면서 6자 회담을 통해 한국인 북한 사람들의 수명을 개선하는 장기적 목표를 달성할 수 있다. 
¶7. (C) Hyun said that the key to Lee's North Korea policy 
was to ensure denuclearization and then help North Korea 
attain 3,000 USD per capita GDP. Only when all North Koreans 
had a TV and a refrigerator, and many had a car, would the 
North Korean people demand change. Lee therefore would not 
try to force change in North Korea but allow the DPRK to 
decide if it wanted progress and the assistance that opening 
up would bring. Echoing Hyun's remarks, Choi said that the 
goal would be to denuclearize North Korea and then encourage 
slow changes. Without denuclearization, nothing was 
possible, so on that, Choi said, Lee's position was the same 
as the U.S. position. By working through the Six Party Talks 
in close consultation with the U.S. the ROK could attain the 
long-term goal of improving the lives of the North Korean 
people. 

대사는 북한에서 인권 침해가 무시돼서는 안 된다는 이명박의 발언은 호의적으로 받아들여졌다고 말했다. 이명박 자신이 어린 시절 배고픔을 경험했으므로 그는 북한 사람들이 현재 겪는 고통을 안다. 만약 북한이 개방한다면 더 이상 많은 북한 사람들이 굶어 죽지 않을 것이다. 최시중은 이명박이 먹을 수 있는 것은 기본적인 인권이라고 생각한다고 말했다. 

¶8. (C) The Ambassador noted that Lee's statements that human 
rights violations in North Korea would not be ignored were 
well-received. Choi said the most pressing issue was to keep 
North Koreans from starving. Since Lee had himself 
experienced hunger in his youth, he knew the suffering North 
Koreans were experiencing. If North Korea opened up, no more 
North Koreans would starve to death. Choi said Lee thought 
it was a basic human right for people to be able to eat. 
------------- 
GNP Prospects 
------------- 
한나라당 전망

최시중은 한나라당 멤버가 아니며, 그래서 국회 의원 공천에 대한 내부 투쟁에 대해 전문적인 분석을 할 수 없지만, 그럼에도 불구하고 당은 분열되지 않을 것이라고 관측했다. 한나라당은 지난 한 해에 걸쳐 50% 이상의 지지를 누렸다. 또 이명박도 압도적인 국민들의 지지를 받고 있다. 그러므로 당이 분열되거나 국회의원들의 상당수 탈당은 어렵다. 몇몇 한나라당 멤버들은 공천을 받지 못하면 이회창의 당에 합류할 것이다. 그러나 후보가 공천 심사위에 출석한다면, 그 이후에는 탈당할 수 없다. 그러므로 몇몇은 공천 심사가 시작되기 전 당을 떠나겠지만 이는 4월 총선에서 큰 영향을 미치지 않을 것이다. 이명박이 한나라당 대표인 강재섭 그리고 공천심사위 멤버등과 밀접한 협의를 하고 있기 때문에 공천은 당선자의 시각이 반영될 것이 확실하다고 최는 말했다. 

¶9. (C) Choi observed that he was not a member of the GNP and 
therefore could not give expert analysis of the current 
internal struggles over party nominations for the National 
Assembly elections, nonetheless, he expected that the party 
would stay together. The GNP had enjoyed more than 50 
percent public support for over a year, and Lee currently 
enjoyed overwhelming public support. It would therefore be 
very difficult for the party to split or for any significant 
number of lawmakers to leave the party. Some GNP members 
might join Lee Hoi-chang's party if they thought they would 
not otherwise receive a nomination, but after a candidate 
went before the nomination panel, he could not leave the 
party. Therefore, while some might leave the GNP before the 
nomination process began, this would not have a significant 
effect on the results in the election in April. Because Lee 
was in close consultation with GNP Chairman Kang Jae-sup and 
with the members of GNP's nomination committee, Choi said he 
was sure that the nominations would take into account the 
President-elect's views. 

최시중은 역사적으로 정당들은 총선에 앞서 분열하거나 개혁됐다고 지적했다. 그러나 올해는 시간이 너무 없다. 왜냐면 2월말까지 모든 노력이 이명박 정부를 세우고 가동되도록 하는데 모아지고 있기 때문이다. 대신 한나라당이 4월 총선에서 (299석 중에서) 200석을 얻는다면, 당은 분열될 수도 있다. 왜냐면 너무 커서 내부 투쟁을 잠재우기 곤란하기 때문이다. 그러나 만약 한나라당이 150석을 겨우 넘긴다면 국회 지배를 위해 당은 하나로 남아야 하는 처지에 놓일 것이다. 그리고 한나라당은 그들의 일을 하기에 충분한 힘을 확보하는 것이다. 적절한 정부라면 강력한 야당이 출현해야 한다. 그러나 현재로서 유권자들은 민주신당에 실망해 있고, 이는 민주신당의 분열을 촉진할 것이라고 최는 생각했다. 

¶10. (C) Historically, Choi pointed out, political parties 
broke up or reformed just ahead of National Assembly 
elections. There was too little time this year, however, 
because all efforts until late February would be focused on 
getting the Lee administration up and running. Instead, there 
was a chance that if the GNP won 200 (out of 299 total) seats 
in April, the party might then split since it would be so big 
it might not be able to contain internal strife. If, 
however, the GNP won just over the 150 majority, the party 
would be forced to stay together to rule the Assembly. Choi 
said he was confident that the Korean voters would give Lee 
and the GNP just enough power to do their job. For proper 
government, a strong opposition party should emerge. 
Currently, however, voters were still too disappointed in the 
United New Democratic Party (UNDP), which might precipitate 
the UNDP's split, Choi thought. 
---------------- 
In Lee We Trust? 
---------------- 
이명박을 우리가 신뢰할 수 있을까
최는 이명박이 한국 국민들의 신뢰뿐만이 아니라 미국의 신뢰도 누리고 있으며 그는 결코 미국을 실망시키지 않을 것이라고 자신 있게 말했다. 그럼에도 불구하고, 한국인들은 빠른 변화를 원하고 기대가 높기 때문에 국민들의 욕구를 충족시키기는 어려울 것이다. 이명박의 임무는 지난 15년의 정부에서 자라난 잡초들을 뽑아내는 것이다. 그리고 이러한 노력의 결과는 차기 정부까지는 가시적이지 않을 것이다. 최시중은 한국 국민들이 이런 점을 이해하지 못할까 걱정된다고 말했다. 
¶11. (C) Choi confidently said that Lee now had not only the 
Korean people's trust, but also the trust of the U.S., and he 
would never let the U.S. down. Nonetheless, because Koreans 
wanted quick changes and had high expectations, it might be 
difficult to fulfill people's hopes. Lee's job was to pull 
the weeds that had sprung up during the last 15 years of 
government and the results of this effort might not be seen 
until the next administration. Choi said he was worried 
Koreans would not understand this. 

최시중은 또 과거 서울시장으로서 또 기업 CEO로서 시야가 제한적이기 때문에 그 자신이 변화해야만 한다고 말했다. 대통령으로서 이명박은 좀 더 광범위한 마음가짐을 가져야 할 필요가 있고, 나라를 성공적으로 이끌기 위해 사회 제반 분야에서 인재를 끌어와야 할 것이다. 그러나 최시중은 이명박은 거의 동물적인 본능을 갖고 있어서 변화하는 상황과 환경에 적응할 수 있고, 그의 발 빠른 대응이 좋은 정책의 형태로 반영될 것이라고 덧붙였다. 이명박은 그의 불도저 이미지를 벗어 던지고 그 자신을 컴도저(Com-dozer), 즉 컴퓨터 불도저로 부르게 했다. 왜냐면 그가 문제를 갈아엎어 버리는 대신, 컴퓨터와 같은 좀 더 나은 방법적 접근을 채택해야 했기 때문이다. 
¶12. (C) Choi also commented that Lee had to remake himself 
since his past experiences as Seoul Mayor and as a CEO were 
limited in scope. As president, Lee would need to have a 
broader mindset and bring in personnel from all sectors of 
society to lead the country successfully. Lee had an almost 
animal-like instinct to adapt to changing situations and 
environments, Choi added, however, his quick reactions would 
be reflected in good policies. Shedding his bulldozer image, 
Lee had taken to calling himself a Com-dozer or 
computer-bulldozer because he recognized that instead of 
plowing over problems, he had to adopt the more methodical 
approach of a computer. 

------- 
Comment 
------- 
코멘트

최시중은 그가 이명박을 옹호하지 않았다고 말했다. 그러나 동시에 그는 과거에 이명박이 그로 하여금 그를 대신에 인터뷰하게 했다고 자랑했다. 왜냐면 최시중이 이명박과 많은 생각을 공유하기 때문이다. 최시중은 이상득을 제외하고는 그 누구보다는 권위 있게 이명박에 대해 말한다. 이상득 이명박의 형이다. 최시중은 이 과정에서 이상득보다 좀 더 분석적인 마인드를 가지고 있다. 그는 어떤 비밀 누설도 거부했다. 만약 그가 비밀들을 말한다면, 더 이상 비밀이 아닐 수 있다면서 그랬다. 그러나 그는 현인택이 이명박의 외교 정책에서 중심적 역할을 할 것이라고 말했다. 아마도 현이 이명박 정부 초대 외교부 장관이 될 수도 있다는 암시일 수도 있다. 

¶14. (C) Choi said he did not speak for Lee, but at the same 
time boasted that in the past Lee had sent him to do 
interviews in his stead because Choi shared so much of the 
President-elect's thinking. Choi speaks as authoritatively 
for Lee as anyone other than Lee Sang-deuk, the 
President-elect's brother, and he brings a more analytical 
mind than the elder Lee to the process. He refused to give 
away any secrets, saying if he told them, they would no 
longer be secret. He noted, however, that Hyun would play a 
central role on Lee's foreign policy team, perhaps hinting 
that Hyun could be the first foreign minister.
STANTON 
