^  문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  배포일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL903  |  2008-05-01 08:24  |  2011-08-30 01:44  |  기밀  |  서울대사관  |  {{tag>MARR PARM PREL PGOV PINS KN KS CH JA }}  |
====== 제 목: 국무부 부장관의 5월 7~8일 서울 방문을 위한 무대 연출 ======
  * 기 밀 SEOUL 000903 
  * 국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
  * 국방부망 배포
  * 버시바우 대사가 국무부 부장관께((FROM AMBASSADOR VERSHBOW TO THE DEPUTY SECRETARY))
  * 행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 04/30/2018 
  * 태그: MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), PARM(([Arms Controls and Disarmament])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PINS(([National Security])), KN(([Korea (North)])), KS(([Korea (South)])), CH(([China (Mainland)])), JA(([Japan; Okinawa; Ryukyu Islands]))
  * 제 목: 국무부 부장관의 5월 7~8일 서울 방문을 위한 무대 연출
  * 분류자: 알렉산더 버시바우 대사  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
  * 번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/05/07 08:08//
===== 요점 =====
1.(기밀) 부장관님의 방한은 4월 18~19일 캠프 데이비드 정상회담 중에 있을 것이며, 국무부 장관은 6월 말 서울에 들릴 것으로 예상됩니다. 게이츠 국방장관 역시 6월 3일 주한미군 사령관 이·취임식 행사 차 방한 할 것입니다. 해당 방문에 이어 두 번째 한미 정상회담이 G-8 정상회의 이후, 7월 중순 서울에서 있을 것입니다. 한국에 대한 미 고위급 관리들의 이러한 높은 수준의 관심은 친미 대통령인 이명박 당선과 소속 당인 한나라당의 지난 달 총선 승리로 인해 주여진 기회를 감안할 때 합당하고 또 현명한 것입니다. 우리는 양국관계의 새로운 활력을 불어 넣을 뿐만 아니라, 오랜 우방국인 동시에 전략적으로 위치한 한 동맹국과의 확장된 //“21세기 전략적 동맹”//의 방향을 설정하기 위한 훌륭한 기회인 것입니다.

2.(기밀) 제가 캠프 데이비드 회담에 있었고 해서, 두 대통령이 개인적으로나 본질적으로 진정 통한다는 사실을 증명할 수있습니다. 두 분이 함께 한미관계의 회복과 격상을 위한 방향을 잡기 시작했습니다. 무엇보다도, 두 분이 협력해서 4개의 핵심 영역에서 한미관계를 강화하기로 합의 했습니다:
  * 2008년 중 한미 FTA 비준

  * 북한 접근 방식의 조율, 6자 회담이나 남북관계에 있어 노무현 시절의 경우 그 이상의 양국의 긴밀하고 일관된 공조;

  * //“21세기 전략적 동맹”//으로 한미동맹을 격상, 즉 전통적인 한반도 평화 유지 임무와 더불어 역내 및 세계적 도전과제의 해결 방향의 확대; 그리고

  * 올해 말 즈음에 한국의 비자면제프로그램 회원국 가입
3.(기밀) 금번 전문은 우리가 이런 여러 목표들을 발전시키는데 현재 해야할 일이 무엇인지, 그리고 부장관님의 방한이 이런 여러 노력들에 어떻게 힘을 보태도록 할 것인지 등에 집중하는 것입니다. 계획된 바 당신이 초점을 맞춘 평화·안보 메커니즘을 고려해서, 우리는 그 구상에 대한 일부 통찰을 담아보았습니다. 또한 대 중국 및 일본에 대한 새 정부의 접근 방식에 대사관의 시각, 그리고 그러한 여러 주제상에 논의 할 만한 여러 분야를 제시합니다. 대사관은 국내 정치 지형에 대한 최신 소식, 요약하면―새 대통령과 그의 참모진의 실수로 산통이 있기는 하지만―지난 10년 중 어떤 시기보다도 미국의 여러 이해에 훨씬 더 호의적입니다. //요점 끝.//
===== 한미 FTA =====
4.(기밀) 이명박의 5일간의 방미와 캠프 데이비드 회동에서의 핵심 주안점은 한미 FTA의 통과입니다. 이 대통령은 쇠고기 문제를 해결하는 것이 부시 대통령의 통상 의제를 그가 지원하는 어떤 가시적인 증명이 될 것이며, 그리고 그 점이 미 의회를 통과할 여하한 가능성을 갖도록 하는데 필수임을 이해했습니다. 그래서, 이명박은 정상회담 전날 밤에 쇠고기 협정을 승인하는 용기있는 결정을 함으로써, 이 5년 묶은 논란을 국제수역사무국의 과학적인 준칙에 완전히 부합하는 방식으로 해결한 것입니다. 그 결정으로 그는 자국 내에서 일부 비난 세례를 당하고 있지만,  동요하는 기색이 없습니다. 이명박은 이젠 가능하면 한국 국회에서의 조속한 한미 FTA 비준을 담보하려는 시도를 하고 있습니다.

5.(기밀) 그러나 다수 한국 국회의원들은 미 의회에 시선을 주목하고 있는데, 그 이유는 올해 미 의회가 조치에 나설 가망도 없는 상황에, 어떤 형태로든 정치적인 자본 투자의 확대를 원하질 않기 때문입니다. 당신의 대화 상대역들은 미 의회의 비준이 실행 가능한 것인지 재차 확인을 구하고, 또한 정치적으로 어려운 결정인 쇠고기 해결이 헛수고가 되지 않길 바라는 것입니다. 이들은 //“콜롬비아 FTA와 (그 뒤를 잇는 것이 아닌) 병행해서”// 한미 FTA을 비준할 것이라는 부시 대통령의 발언, 그리고  각각의 FTA는 자체적인 절차를 밟고 있다는 수잔 스왑의 공개적인 발언에도 고무되어 있습니다.

6.(기밀) 분명한 것은 대선의 해인 올해 미국에서의 통상 토론의 결과를 예단하기 어렵지만, 15년 FTA 역사에서 상업적으로 가장 중요한 미국 FTA인 만큼, 한미 FTA는 활동이 활발한 미국 사업계에서 폭 넚은 지지기반을 확보하고 있습니다. 무려 500개가 넘는 기업체와, 기관 그리고 지역사회모임들이 미국에서 //“한미 FTA 기업연합”//을 결성했습니다―미국 FTA 역사상 가장 큰 후원 모임. 한미 FTA가 가져올 경제적 혜택을 이해하고 있는 제조업체, 서비스 부문 회사, 그리고 농업 이해관계자, 그리고 수많은 지역사회모임 및 지역 상공회의소 사이에도 앞선 설명과 동일한 지지가 골고루 분포되어 있다. 부장관께서 회동할 여러 한국 관리들을 안심시키기의 방편으로 미국내 해당 지지 중 일부를 지적하길 바람하지 않을 것입니다.
 
7.(기밀) 현재까지 미국에서 FTA토론에서는 협정에 자체에 대한 반대( 한국 시장을 활짝 개방한 FTA 조항에도 불구, 특히 자동차 부문) 그리고 일반적인 자유무역에 대한 반대자들이 압도적 우위를 점하고 있습니다. 그러나 우리는 그런 미국 내 반대 견해를 한국인의 관점에서 투영해 볼 필요가 있습니다. 사실상 미국이 현재까지 타결한 모든 FTA에서 보면―특히 중요한 통상 당사국과의―해당 협정의 여러 반대파들이 처음엔 적극적인 목소리를 냈지만, 종국에는 서명한 모든 FTA가 비준되었습니다. 우리는 모든 표를 필요로 하지 않고, 단지 상·하원에서의 다수표가 필요합니다.
===== 북한 정책 =====
8.(기밀) 과거 10년 동안에, 북한 정책을 두고 미국과 한국사이 견해차가 벌어졌는데, 아마도 한미 동맹에 있어 가장 큰 문제로 꼽을 수있을 것입니다. 비록 6자 회담에서 우리가 동일한 입장을 고수하기 했지만, 남북 관계를 보면 때때로 여러 단절상황이 있었습니다. 이 대통령은 북한 정부에 대한 매우 실용적인 정책을 옹호함으로, 해당 견해차를 대개 줄일 수있습니다. 그의 실용적 정책은 어떤 중요한 경제 원조를 위해선 북한의 비핵화를 전제조건으로 할 뿐만 아니라 남북 관계의 실익에 있어 호혜주의를 원칙으로 삼는 것입니다.

9.(기밀) 이명박의 북한정책이 미국에 입장에선 좋은 뉴스이지만, 북한 언론이 히스테리적인 막말의 집중포화와 이명박에 대한 인신공격을 시작하는 등 이명박은 김정일의 격노를 초래했는데, 최소한 현재로선 남북관계를 틀어지게하고, 잠재적으로 한반도상에 긴장을 고조시킬 것입니다. 부장관께서 북한의 (아직은 남한 대중을 동요시키지 못한) 대남 선동을 상대하는 남한 대중의 은근과 끈기를 칭송하고, 북한정부가 한미간을 사이를 벌리도록 미국이 허락하지 않을 것이라고 대화 상대자를 안심시키세요. 우리는 6자 회담 과정과 북한과의 폭넚은 교섭과정에서 함께 전진함에 있어 한국정부와 가능한 긴밀한 공조를 유지하길 원하고 있습니다.

10.(기밀) (밑에서 논의할)동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘과 더불어, 한국민은 아마 북한에 대한 식량원조 논의에 관심이 있을 것입니다. 현재까지는, 북한의 원조 요청이 필요하다며, 북한에게 경제적 보조금에 상당하는 쌀과 비료를 주기적으로 수송하는, 진정한 인도주의 요구와는 관계없는 노무현의 정책을 유지하지 않을 것이라고 말했습니다. 국제 식량 가격이 역대 최고인 상황에, 요청을 받는다고 상당한 쌀 원조를 제공할 여력이 되는지도 의구심을 표하고 있습니다. 그러나 미국이 북한과의 식량원조를 위한 대화를 곧 재계할 것이라는 여러 보도와 함께, 한국 당국자들은 북한에서의 기근에 대해서 매정하다고 인식될 것을 두려워하게 되었고 해서, 아마 식량 문제에 대해 미국과 더욱 긴밀한 조율을 원할 것입니다.
===== 21세기 전략적 한미동맹 =====
11.(기밀) 캠프 데이비드에서 부시 대통령과 이 대통령은 한미 안보동맹을 //“21세기 전략적 동맹”//으로 격상할 것을 주창했습니다. 현실적으로 그 발언이 무슨 의미인지는 여전히 작업이 진행 중입니다. 우리는 이라크에 한국군 파병 연장 약속이나 대량살상무기 확산방지구상에 가입 등에 대한 조속한 결정하라고 고의로 압박하지는 않았습니다―쇠고기 시장 개방은 새로 선출된 한국 대통령에게는 중량 감있는 결정입니다. 그러나 7월 정상회담에 맞추어 더 살을 붙일 작정이며, 그 때쯤이면 양국 정상이 한미 동맹에 대한 //“비전 성명”//을 제시하고 추가적인 성과물을 발표할 수 있다는 점은 합의를 보았습니다.

12.(기밀) 양국 정상은 한반도에 주한 미군을 (2008년 말 25,000명으로 줄이기 사전 계획 보다는) 현 수준인 28.500명 수준으로 감축을 멈추기로 캠프 데이비드에서 결정했습니다. 비록 공식적으로 발표되지 않았지만, 이 대통령 역시 카불 근처에 새 아프간 경찰 훈련소에 한국의 여러 훈련요원들을 보내는데 합의했는데, 이는 한국이 사전에 약속한 바그람에 한 병원에서 활동할 민간 의료요원 및 호위 경찰요원에 추가로 덧붙여진 것입니다. 한국은 현재 레바논에 350인원의 부대를 파견했으며, 최근에는 수단에 조사팀을 보냈고, 장래 우발상황에 대비해서 상비 평화유지군을 창설하는 법안을 심사 중입니다.

13.(기밀) 이 대통령은, 새 국회가 6월에 개원한 이후에, 북부 이라크에서 성공적으로 활동 중인 한국군 600인원의 파견된 부대를 확대할 것을 모색한다고 암시했습니다. 그는 또한 아프간에서 다른 비전투 공헌이 가능할 것임을 제시했습니다. 그러나 //“21세기 전략적 동맹”//이 미국정부의 여러 요구를 수용하는 것이지 양국의 상호 이해관계에 부합하는 것이 아니라는 언론의 협의에 대해 한국민들은 예민합니다. 그리고 군사 활동에 있어서, 한국사람들은 무슨 수를 써서라도 어떠한 사상자 발생을 피하려고 합니다.

14.(기밀) 한미동맹을 격상한다는 의미에는 서울 중심부에 있는 현재의 한미연합사령부의 변환을 완성한다는 의미로―전시에 한미 연합군을 미국 준장이 이끌던 것을―장례에는 한국전투사령부를((번역 주: KORCOM -- the U.S. Korea Command)) 한강 이남인 평택시의 새 미군기지에서 운용하는 것이며, 2012년에 전시 작전권을 이양한 이후에는 새로운 한국의 전략적 사령부에 지원을 제공할 것이다. 북한의 위협이 최대 관심사인 가운데, 한미동맹의 현실적 일상은 한반도상의 미군의 주둔과 관련된 쟁점사안 및 그에 수반하는 모든 여러 문제들을 중심으로 더 돌아가고 있습니다.
  * 좋은 소식은 한국내 미군의 주둔 위치와 임무 모두 적절하게 변환하는 3가지 합의안을 갖추고 있는 점입니다. 그 내용은 주한미군사령부를 평택으로 이전하는 용산기지이전사업, 한국내 100개가 넘는 주한미군 시설들을 핵심적인 2개의 전략적 요충지로 통폐합하는 연합토지관리계획, 2012년에 전시 작전권을 한국군으로 이양하기 위한 전략적 이양 계획 등입니다. 영문 약칭으로 YRP, LPP, 그리고 STP 이며, 더욱 간단하게는: //“동맹 변환계획”//입니다.

  * 나쁜 소식은 그런 변환이 힘겨우며, 모든 3개의 합의를 이행하는데 최종적으로 수백억 달러의 비용이 든다는 것입니다. 그러므로 청와대가 국방예산을 포함한 한국 정부 전반에 10퍼센트 예산삭감을 요청한 점이 문제로 보이는 것입니다; 캠프 데이비드에서 //“한국군에 충분한 돈을 제공하라”//고 부시 대통령이 이 대통령에게 촉구한 점을 볼 때 충분히 곤욕스러운 것이다. 우리가 역시 걱정하는 점은 노무현 정부 시절에 발생한 바대로, 한국민이 새 방위비 분담금 특별협정, 그리고 9개 주한미군 수용시설과 기지의 반환에 대한 제반 조건에 대해 크게 분개하게 될 것인지 여부입니다.

15.(기밀) 그러므로 부장관께서 방한 중에 우리의 입장인 동맹변환사업이 충실히 이행돼야 하며, 해당 동의안 하의 한국의 여러 책무를 다하도록 충분히 기금조성을 해야 하며, 방위비 분담금 특별협정이나 기지 반환사업 등이 정치 쟁점화되는 것을 방지해야 할 필요가 있다는 점을 분명히 제시한다면 이로울 것입니다. 당면한 목표가 //“21세기 전략적 동맹”//의 주문에 걸맞게 건전하고 순조롭게 운영되는 안보관계가 되어야만 합니다.
===== 비자면제프로그램의 회원국 가입 =====
16.(기밀)마지막으로, 4월 17일 워싱턴에서 유명환 외교통상부 장관과 처토프 국토안보부 장관이 양해각서를 서명한 이후에, 2008년 말 경이 될 한국의 비자면제프로그램 회원국 가입에 대한 기대감이 커지고 있다. 당신의 대화 상대역은 국토안보부의 전자여행허가제 구현과 개발 및 비자면제협정상에 미국을 입국하는 여행자의 출국을 검증하는 제도를 포함하는 미국정부가 아직 실현하지 못한 비자면제협정의 여러 요건들에 대해 미국의 조속한 조치를 아마 압박할 것입니다.

17.(기밀) 마찬가지로, 한국정부는 금번 양해각서 하에 요구되는 부속 이행약정이 무엇인지 알길 열망하며, 특히 한국의 사생활 보호법상에 보호되는 한국인 개인의 범죄기록에 대한 미국정부의 공개 요청에 관련해서 그렇습니다. 이들 이행약정을 차제하더라도, 한국정부는 비자면제프로그램의 가입에 해당 여러 요건들을 거의 완수했다고 믿고 있습니다. 전자여권을 공직자나 외교관에게 현재 발급되고 있는 중이며, 8월 중 일반 국민들도 지급받기 시작할 것입니다. 부장관께서는 이런 세부 사항을 파고 들어갈 필요가 없으며, 양국이 해당 문제를 추가적으로 논의하는데 적합한 포럼 참석 차, 국토안보부 관계자의 한 차례 방한이 6월 중순에 예정되어 있음을 적시할 수있습니다. 해당 국토안보부 팀이 비자면제프로그램에 한국의 회원국 가입이 미합중국의 안보나 법 집행 및 이민 등의 이해관계에 미칠 영향력을 공식적으로 평가하기 위해 올 것입니다. 
===== 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘에 대한 한국의 생각 =====
18.(기밀) 부장관께서는 한국이 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘 개념의 강력한 후원자란 점을 믿어도 좋습니다. 그 근거는 남한이 강력한 국제주의자 전통이 있고, 이 대통령이 중국, 일본 그리고 러시아와의 관계 개선에 실용적 입장이며, 한국에서 6자 회담 과정은 상당한 신뢰감을 누리고 있습니다. 우리가 관련 한국정부 공무원과 한국의 주요 지역안보 전문가들과의 논의에서 뽑아낸 본 쟁점에 대한 생각의 줄기는 다음과 같습니다.
  * 국제주의자 전통: //“고래(중국과 일본) 사이의 새우”//에서 보듯이, 한국은 역사적으로 대화 테이블에서 한국정부에게 한 자리를 제공해면서, 역내 안정에 기여하도록 하는 국제적인 모임을 선호합니다. 이런 점이 아세안 지역안보포럼, 아세안플러스3, 그리고 아시아 태평양 경제 협력체에서 한국이 적극적인 역할을 맡도록 하고 있는 것입니다. 이 대통령은 국제적인 원조 스펙을 증가시키려 계획하고 있고, 한국인을 유엔 사무총장으로 보유한 점에 상당한 자부심이 있습니다. 마찬가지로, 남한 사람들은 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘의 열렬한 후원자이며, 특히 신뢰 구축 구상을 추구하는 수단으로 보는 것입니다. 동시에, 한국민이 역사의 교훈으로 삼은 것은 너무 많은 역내 강국을 한반도에 초대하지 말라는 것이며, 그런 이유로 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘을 평화 체제 협상과 별개로 두길 원하는 것이며, 그래서 러시아나 일본을 평화 체제에서 배제한 것입니다.

  * 미국을 포함한 전후사정 속의 실용적이고 지역적인 관점: 두 //“고래”//와 한국의 관계에 대한 바로 이전 논의를 다시 보면, 이 대통령은 자신의 정부가 미래 지향적이고 실용적일 것임을 표명한 점은, 역사에 불만을 품은 그의 전임자인 노무현의 사고방식으로부터의 전환이라고 할 것입니다. 12월 취임사에서, 이 대통령은 //“우리는 가까운 이웃인 일본, 중국, 그리고 러시아와 평화와 공동번영을 추구할 것이다”//라고 말했습니다. 그는 그 후 (한해 한 차례씩 왕복으로 지도자가 방문을 갖는) //“셔틀 외교”// 재계를 발표했고,  캠프 데이비드에서 돌아오는 길에 4월 일본 방문으로 셔틀 외교를 시작되었습니다. 그는 미합중국과의 //“전략적인 동맹”//을 강화하는 것이 자신의 최우선 과제임을 매우 분명이 해왔기 때문에, 우리는 한국이 역내 약속일정에 치우쳐 미국을 도외시할 것을 걱정할 필요는 없습니다.

  * 6자 회담 경험은 동북아 외교·안보 메커니즘의 좋은 징조: 시작부터, 한국은 6자 회담에서 적극적이고 도움이 되는 역할을 해왔습니다. 무대 뒤에서, 한국민들은 경제·에너지 협력 작업반을 성심껏 주재함으로써 일이 지속적으로 가동되도록 도와왔습니다. 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘 작업반은 러시아가 주재했지만, 한국의 참여로 혜택을 입었습니다. 예를 들면, 외교통상부 관리들이 대필한 개념문서를 주재국 러시아가 회원국 대표들에게 배포한 바있습니다. 이렇듯이, 한국민은 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘이 하나의 기구로 자리 맥임 하면 자신의 역량을 발휘할 것으로 예상할 수있습니다. 
 
19.(기밀) 그러나, 그러한 하나의 기구로써 실재 무엇을 달성할 수있을 지에 관해서, 한국민은 종종 38선에서 생각이 멈춰버립니다. 지난 노무현 정부 시절에, 한국 전쟁의 종식을 심지어 비핵화 이전에 선언할 수있다는 순진한 희망이 있었는데, 한국전 종식으로 북한이 충분히 안심하도록 해서, 자체 핵 사업을 포기하고, 그렇게 해서 동북아 평화의 길이 열릴 것이라는 것입니다. 한국민은 그런 접근방식을 결코 받아들이지 않았으며, 이명박 정부는 훨씬 냉정하게, 비핵화란 말을 평화체제란 마차의 앞에 재장착시킨 것입니다((번역 주: 비유적인 표현을 풀어보면, 말이 없이 마차를 끌고 가듯이, 마찬가지로 비핵화가 평화체제를 끌고 간다는 한다는 말이다.)). 결론적으로 한국은 북한의 반항기 때문에 전반적인 동북아 평화를 장기적인 과정으로 판단하고 있으며, 현실적으로 최소한 가까운 장례에 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘이 무엇을 할 수있을지 회의적일 것입니다. 그러므로 부장관께서 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘이, 예로 남한사람들이 2007년 3월 첫 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘 작업반 회의에서 제안한 합동 탐색 및 구조 연습이나 북한에 식량원조나 영농기술을 제공하는 동북아 평화·안보 메커니즘 접근방식을 공조하는 등의 소규모 신뢰구축 조치로 순조롭게 출범하도록 하는 구상을 한국 관리들에게 타진해보면서 일을 시작하길 원하실 겁니다.
===== 역내 쟁점들 =====
20.(기밀) 일본정부가 남한의 정세 변화에 최고의 수혜국에 속합니다. 이 대통령은 이미 후쿠다 총리와 두 차례 회동했습니다. 지난 주 일본에서, 이명박과 후쿠다는 양국관계를 개선해서 //“신시대”//을 건설하기로 서약했습니다. 북한 핵과 납치 문제에 대해 긴밀히 협조하고, 지구 온난화와 빈곤한 국가들에 대한 개발 원조 같은 세계적인 쟁점사안을 다루고, 경제적 유대관계도 강화하기로 합의했습니다. 역시 중요한 점은 빈번한―적어도 한해에 한 차례―상호 방문을 서로간에 약속한 점입니다. 이러한 모든 것은 일본을 보는 남한의 시각을 점차 따뜻하게 하는데 크게 도움이 될 것이며, 고이즈미·노무현 시절에 역사 및 영토 논란이 한일 유대관계에 있어 부담감으로 작용했던 것과는 상당히 달라진 것입니다.  부장관께서 한일 관계를 개선하는 것이 역내나 세계 속 여러 쟁점상에 3자 협력을 강화시키는 기회라며 독려하고, 강조하길 확실히 원하실 것입니다. 캠프 데이비드에서 부시 대통령은 한미일 3자 정상회담을 페루 아시아 태평양 경제 협력체 정상회담 한켠에서 갖다고 제안했습니다.

21.(기밀) 중국에 대한 이명박 정부의 입장은 미묘한 차이가 있습니다. 역사적으로 남한을 보호하던 권력이며, 지금은 최대 교역상대국입니다. 중국은 막대한 기회와 위험을 동시에 제공합니다. 이명박은 소위 중국과의 //“실용주의 외교”//라는 꽤 현명한 선택을 했습니다. 즉, 그는 경제적으로 번영하는 관계 속에서 //“친선”// 기반의 정치적인 관계를 목도하길 원하고 있습니다. 그렇게 하는 것이 말하는 것처럼 쉽지는 않은 이유는 대부분 한국인들이 중국을 꽤 염려하며, 또한 빠르게 성장하는 중국의 역내 영향력에 겁을 먹고 있습니다. 가장 최근 일을 보면, 서울에서의 성화 봉송 중에 북한과 티베트 인권에 대한 중국의 입장에 대해 시위를 한 남한학생들을 중국 학생들이 폭력적으로 공격한 일이 있었습니다. 남한사람들은 중국인들의 겁주기 행위에 목청껏 비난했고, 특히 해당 중국인들을 통제하는데 한국이 법집행을 겁내 하는 것에 대해 분개했습니다. 저변에 깔린 긴장감의 또 다른 원인은 중국이 정치적으로나 경제적으로 한국에게는 북한에 가장 영향력 있는 경쟁국이라는 점입니다. 전임 노무현과 같이 이명박도 걱정하는 점은 중국의 북한 무역 및 원조가 북한 경제생활을 지배하고 있고, 북한의 생산 역량의 큰 부분을 자체 투자로 사들이기 시작했다는 점입니다. 한중 유대관계에 이러한 제약을 고려하면, 부장관께서 미국정부는 중국과의 실용적 외교의 기치를 환영한다고 한국사람들을 안심시키길 권장합니다; 즉, 미국과 한국정부의 강력한 동맹관계와 한중간 친선관계가 양립한다고 미국이 믿는다고 하는 것입니다.
===== 남한 정세 =====
22.(기밀) 최근 대선과(2007년 12월) 국회의원 선거에서의(2008년 4월) 정치적인 숙취현상이 아직 가시지 않고 있는데, 현재 국내 정세를 가늠하기 어렵다는 의미입니다. 비록 보수세력이 양 선거에서 크게 승리했지만, 5월 말까지는 해당 의석을 점유하지 못합니다. 그러는 동안 이 나라 사람들은 이명박이 당면한 전 세계적 경제 침체 속에서 경제를 되살리겠다는 선거 공약을 완수할 것인지 궁금해 하고 있습니다. 한반도를 가로지르는 운하 망을 건설하겠다는 그의 핵심 계획의 운명은 확실치 않습니다. 장관 지명자 중 3명이 재산상의 의혹 때문에 이명박 취임 전부터 사퇴해야 했습니다. 그리고 4월 말에는 청와대 고위 비사관이 부정하게 취득한 재산의 가능성을 둘러싼 논란 끝에 \\ 국방부망 배포 \\ 사임했습니다.  일부는 이 기회를 이명박을 비판하는 데 이용하고 있는 가운데, 모든 부류의 한국 정치가들은 대개 새 대통령과 어떤 관계 설정을 할 것인지 관련해서 여전히 신중히 주변을 살피는 모습인 듯합니다.

23.(기밀) 18대 국회는 5월 29일에 소집되지만, 집권당인 한나라당과 주요 야당인 통합민주당은 7월 초 소속당 전당대회를 통해서 지도부를 교체할 것이며, 그래서 7월 중순까지는 업무 실천을 심각하게 고려하는데 방해가 될 것입니다. (현재 진행 중인) 전래없는 레임덕 임시국회라고 이 대통령은 부르는 17대 국회는 5월 25일에 자리에서 물러납니다. 일부는 한미 FTA가 이번 임시국회 중에 통과된다는 희망을 놓지 않은 가운데, 대부분의 대사관 정보통은 말하길 물러나는 국회가 새 대통령에게(또는 미국정부에게) 알짜배기를 제공할 가능성은 거의 없거나 전혀 없다고 말하고 있습니다. 정치 관측통은 평하길, 대통령으로써 이명박의 가장 큰 도전은 국회와의 협력 방법 및 자신의 정책 구상에 대한 대중적 공감대 형성하는 방법을 익혀야 할 것입니다―해당 기술은 이명박의 전생이라고 할 수있는 강력한 시장시절, 그리고 하면 된다라는 기업가 시절에는 필요치 않던 기술입니다. 새 국회가 결국 업무에 돌입하는 시점인 늦은 여름이 진정한 시험무대가 될 것입니다. 보수가 지배하는 국회는 이명박에게는 밝은 앞날을 예고하고 있지만, 이명박이 자신의 목표를 달성하기 위해선 한나라당 내부와 야당의 전체의 비판세력과 협력하는 방안을 모색해야 할 것입니다.

24.(기밀) 지금 현재 정치적인 별자리가 잘 배치되어 있는 상태입니다. 쇠고기에 대해서, 이명박은 제 할 일을 할 역량이 있음을 보여주었습니다. 두 달도 체 않되 그는 훨씬 더 호의적인 입법부를 하사받을 것입니다. 그러나 무엇보다도, 남한국민들은 미합중국과의 긴밀한 관계를 제삼 제사 지지하고 있음을 계속 보여주고 있습니다. 부장관님을 시작으로, 이번 다가올 일련의 미국정부 고위급 방문은 동북아시아란 영토 중 가장 전략적인 위치에서 미국의 입지를 격상시킬 하나의 기회입니다. 우리는 5월 7일에 부장관님을 목도하길 고대하고 있습니다.
//버시바우//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/---10/08seoul903|프와로 탐정의 번역]] (c) 무단복제나 전제를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 및 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 08SEOUL903.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000903 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR VERSHBOW TO THE DEPUTY SECRETARY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/30/2018 
TAGS: MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], PARM [Arms Controls and Disarmament],
PREL [External Political Relations], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs],
PINS [National Security], KN [Korea (North)], KS [Korea (South)],
CH [China (Mainland)], JA [Japan; Okinawa; Ryukyu Islands] 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR THE DEPUTY SECRETARY'S MAY 7-8 
VISIT TO SEOUL 
 
Classified By: AMB. ALEXANDER VERSHBOW.  REASONS 1.4 (b/d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Your visit to Korea falls between the April 18-19 Camp 
David Summit and the Secretary's expected stop in Seoul at 
the end of June.  Secretary Gates will also be coming for the 
U.S. Forces Korea (USFK) change-of-command ceremony on June 
¶3.  These visits will be followed by a second U.S.-ROK summit 
in Seoul in mid-July, after the G-8.  So much high-level 
attention to South Korea by senior U.S. officials is both 
warranted and wise given the opportunity presented by the 
election of pro-American President Lee Myung-bak and the 
victory of his party, the GNP, in last month's National 
Assembly elections.  We have an excellent chance of 
revitalizing bilateral relations as well as setting the 
course for an expanded "21st Century Strategic Alliance" with 
a country that is both a long-standing friend and 
strategically placed ally. 
 
¶2. (C) I was at the Camp David meetings, and can attest to 
the fact that the two presidents really connected, both 
personally and substantively.  Together, they began to set 
the direction for the restoration and upgrading of U.S.-ROK 
relations.  Above all, they agreed to work together to 
strengthen the relationship in four key areas: 
 
-- Ratification of the Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement during 
2008; 
 
-- A coordinated approach to dealing with North Korea, with 
closer synchronization of the Six Party Talks and 
inter-Korean relations than was the case under Roh Moo-Hyun; 
 
-- Upgrading of the U.S.-ROK Alliance to a "21st Century 
Strategic Alliance," that is increasingly oriented toward 
addressing global and regional challenges alongside its 
traditional mission of keeping the peace on the Peninsula; and 
 
-- Korea's accession to the Visa Waiver Program by the end of 
this year. 
 
¶3. (C) This message focuses on what we currently need to do 
to advance those goals and how your visit will serve to 
enhance those efforts.  Given your planned focus on the North 
East Asia Peace and Security Mechanism (NEAPSM), we have 
incorporated some insights into their thinking.  We also 
offer our perspective on the new Administration's approach to 
China and Japan, and possible areas for discussion on those 
subjects.  We conclude with an update on the domestic 
political landscape, which -- despite some stumbles by the 
new President and his team -- has become far more favorable 
to U.S. interests than at any time in the last ten years. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------- 
THE KORUS FTA 
------------- 
 
¶4. (C) A key focus of Lee's five-day visit and the Camp David 
meetings was passage of the Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement 
(KORUS FTA).  President Lee understood that resolving the 
beef issue would be a tangible demonstration of his support 
for President Bush's trade agenda, and that it was essential 
for the FTA to have any chance of passing the Congress. 
Thus, he took the courageous decision to approve an agreement 
on the eve of the summit that resolves this five-year-old 
dispute in a manner that is fully consistent with OIE 
scientific guidelines.  He is taking some flak for this 
decision domestically, but shows no sign of wavering.  Lee is 
now trying to secure the earliest possible ratification of 
the FTA by the ROK National Assembly. 
 
¶5. (C) Many Korean legislators will, however, keep an eye on 
our Congress, because they will not want to expend any 
political capital if there is no chance of Congressional 
action this year.  Your Korean interlocutors will, therefore, 
 
be looking for reassurance that Congressional ratification is 
doable and that their tough political decision to resolve 
beef was not in vain. They were encouraged by the President's 
statement that we will try to ratify KORUS "in parallel with 
the Colombia FTA," rather than sequentially, and by Susan 
Schwab's public comments that each FTA is on its own track. 
 
¶6. (C) Obviously, it is hard to predict the outcome of the 
U.S. trade debate with any certainty in a presidential 
election year, but as the most commercially significant U.S. 
FTA in 15 years, KORUS has a broad base of very active U.S. 
business support.  Over 500 companies, organizations and 
communities have joined the "U.S.-Korea FTA Business 
Coalition" in the U.S. -- the largest advocacy group for any 
U.S. FTA ever.  That support is equally spread among 
manufacturing firms, service sector companies, and 
agricultural interests, and contains a lot of communities and 
local chambers of commerce that understand the benefits that 
KORUS will bring to their economies.  You may wish to point 
to some of that support as reassurance to the ROK officials 
with whom you meet. 
 
¶7. (C) The debate in the U.S. has thus far been dominated by 
opponents of the agreement (particularly in the autos sector, 
despite the FTA's strong provisions to pry open the Korean 
market) and of free trade in general.  But we need to put 
that in perspective for the Koreans.  For virtually every FTA 
the U.S. has ever concluded -- particularly those with 
important trading partners -- the opponents of the agreement 
have been active and vocal early on, but we have in the end 
ratified every FTA we have signed.  We don't need every vote, 
just a majority in each house of Congress. 
 
------------------ 
NORTH KOREA POLICY 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  (C) During the past decade, the gap that opened up 
between Washington and Seoul over North Korea policy was 
perhaps the single greatest problem in our alliance 
relationship.  Although we managed to stick together in the 
Six Party Talks, there were sometimes disconnects when it 
came to North-South relations.  President Lee has largely 
closed that gap by advocating a very pragmatic policy toward 
Pyongyang that emphasizes denuclearization of the DPRK as the 
precondition for any significant economic assistance, as well 
as the principle of reciprocity of benefits in inter-Korean 
relations. 
 
¶9. (C) While this is good news for us, Lee Myung-bak has 
incurred the wrath of Kim Jong-il, whose media have launched 
a barrage of hysterical rhetoric and ad hominem attacks on 
Lee personally, souring the North-South relations at least 
for the present, and potentially raising tensions on the 
Peninsula.  You may want to praise the Koreans for their 
steadiness in the face of the North Korean propaganda 
campaign (which so far hasn't fazed the South Korean public), 
and assure them that we won't let Pyongyang drive a wedge 
between us.  We want to maintain the closest possible 
coordination with Seoul as we move forward together in the 
Six-Party process and in our wider engagement with the DPRK. 
 
¶10. (C) In addition to the North East Asia Peace and Security 
Mechanism (discussed below), the Koreans may be interested in 
discussing food aid to the North.  Up until now, they have 
said that North Korea needs to request aid, and that they 
will not maintain Roh's policy of routine quarterly rice and 
fertilizer shipments that amount to a subsidy to the North's 
economy, unrelated to genuine humanitarian needs.  With 
global food prices at an all-time high, they have also 
expressed doubt about whether they can afford to provide 
substantial rice aid even if asked.  But with reports that 
the U.S. may soon resume food aid talks with the DPRK, they 
are becoming nervous that they will be perceived as callous 
to starvation in the North, and may want to coordinate more 
closely with us on this subject. 
 
-------------------------------- 
21ST CENTURY STRATEGIC ALLIANCE 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (C) At Camp David, President Bush and President Lee 
called for upgrading the U.S.-ROK security alliance to a 
"21st Century Strategic Alliance."  What this will mean in 
practice, however, is still a work in progress.  We 
deliberately did not press for early decisions on extending 
the Korean troop commitment in Iraq or joining the 
Proliferation Security Initiative -- opening the beef market 
was a heavy-enough lift for a newly elected Korean president. 
 But it was agreed that we would aim to put more flesh on the 
bones in time for the July Summit, at which time the leaders 
could issue a "Vision Statement" about the alliance and 
announce additional deliverables. 
 
¶12. (C) The two leaders did decide at Camp David to halt the 
drawdown in U.S. forces on the Korean Peninsula at the 
current level of 28,500 (rather than reducing to 25,000 by 
the end of 2008 as previously planned).  Although it has not 
been officially announced, President Lee also agreed to send 
ROK trainers to the new Afghanistan police academy near 
Kabul, in addition to the civilian medical personnel and 
police escorts the ROK has previously agreed to send to 
operate a hospital at Bagram.  The ROK also currently has 350 
troops in Lebanon (UNIFIL), recently sent an observer team to 
Sudan, and is considering legislation to establish a standing 
peacekeeping force for future contingencies. 
 
¶13.  (C) President Lee hinted that, after the new National 
Assembly is in place in June, he will consider seeking an 
extension of the dispatch of the ROK's 600 troops serving 
very successfully in Northern Iraq.  He also indicated that 
other non-combat contributions might be possible in 
Afghanistan.  The Koreans are sensitive, however, about media 
allegations that the "21st Century Strategic Alliance" really 
means acceding to more of Washington's demands, rather than 
serving both countries' mutual interests.  And when it comes 
to military action, they seek at all cost to avoid suffering 
any casualties. 
 
¶14. (C) Upgrading the alliance also means completing the 
transformation of today's Combined Forces Command -- which is 
headquartered in the middle of Seoul with a U.S. general 
leading combined Korean and American troops in war -- to 
tomorrow's KORCOM -- the U.S. Korea Command that will operate 
from a new base south of the Han River in Pyongtaek, and will 
provide support to a new ROK Strategic Command after transfer 
of wartime operational control (OPCON) in 2012.  While the 
North Korean threat commands the most attention, the 
day-to-day reality of the U.S.-ROK Alliance revolves more 
around issues relating to the presence of our troops on the 
Peninsula and all the attendant problems that go along with 
that. 
 
-- The good news is that we have three agreements to 
appropriately transform both our military footprint and 
military mission in Korea.  They are the Yongsan Relocation 
Plan to move the USFK headquarters to Pyongtaek, the Land 
Partnership Plan to consolidate what used to be over 100 USFK 
facilities in Korea into two key strategic hubs, and the 
Strategic Transition Plan for the transfer of wartime OPCON 
to the Korean military in 2012.  The shorthand is YRP, LPP 
and STP or simpler still:  "Alliance Transformation." 
 
-- The bad news is that change is hard and implementing all 
three agreements will in the end cost tens of billions of 
dollars.  It is therefore troubling to see that the Blue 
House has called for a 10-percent budget cut across the ROK 
Government, including the Defense Ministry; it was troubling 
enough that President Bush urged President Lee to "give his 
military enough money" at Camp David. We are also worried 
that the Koreans will get wrapped around the axle on a new 
defense cost-sharing agreement (SMA) and on the terms for the 
return of nine closed USFK camps and bases, as occurred 
during the Roh Administration. 
 
¶15. (C) It would therefore be helpful if you underlined our 
position during your visit that Alliance Transformation 
should be fully implemented and fully funded in keeping with 
 
Korea's obligations under those agreements, and that we need 
to prevent the politicization of issues like SMA and camp 
returns.  The goal should be a healthier, smooth-running 
security relationship that lives up to the new mantra of a 
"21st Century Strategic Alliance." 
 
------------------------ 
ROK ACCESSION TO THE VWP 
------------------------ 
 
¶16.  (C) Finally, hopes for Korean entry into the Visa Waiver 
Program (VWP) by the end of 2008 are running high in the ROK 
in the wake of the signing of an MOU in Washington on April 
17 by Foreign Minister Yu Myung-whan and DHS Secretary 
Chertoff.  Your Korean interlocutors will likely push for 
quick U.S. action on the VWP requirements that the USG has 
yet to fulfill, including DHS development and implementation 
of the Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA) and 
a system for verifying the exit of travelers who enter the 
U.S. on the VWP. 
 
¶17.  (C) Equally, the ROKG is eager to know what additional 
implementing arrangements under the MOU might be required, 
particularly with reference to any request for release to the 
USG of individual Koreans' criminal records that are 
ordinarily protected under Korean privacy laws.  Aside from 
these implementing arrangements, the ROKG believes it has all 
but fulfilled its requirements for admission to the VWP. 
E-passports are now being issued to officials and diplomats 
and the general public will start receiving them in August. 
You definitely don't need to wade into these  details, and 
can point to a DHS visit to Seoul scheduled in mid-June as an 
appropriate forum for further bilateral discussion of these 
matters.  That DHS team is coming to conduct a formal 
assessment on the effect that Korea's entry into the VWP 
would have on security, law enforcement and immigration 
interests of the United States. 
 
---------------------- 
ROK THINKING ON NEAPSM 
---------------------- 
 
¶18. (C) You can count on the ROK to be a strong supporter of 
the Northeast Asia Peace and Security Mechanism concept, 
based on South Korea's strong internationalist traditions, 
President Lee's pragmatic desire to improve relations with 
China, Japan and Russia, and the considerable credibility 
that the Six-Party Talks process enjoys here.  Here are the 
main threads of thinking on this issue that we have picked up 
from our discussions with relevant ROKG officials and leading 
Korean regional security experts. 
 
-- INTERNATIONALIST TRADITIONS:  As the "shrimp between two 
whales" (China and Japan), Korea has historically favored 
international groupings that give Seoul a seat at the table 
and contribute to regional stability.  This has led Seoul to 
be an active player in the ASEAN Regional Forum, 
ASEAN-Plus-Three, and APEC.  President Lee plans to increase 
the ROK's international aid profile, and there is 
considerable pride at having a Korean as UN Secretary 
General.  Correspondingly, South Koreans are enthusiastic 
supporters of NEAPSM, especially as a means for pursuing 
confidence-building initiatives.  At the same time, history 
has taught them not to invite too many regional powers to the 
Peninsula, and this is why they want to keep NEAPSM separate 
from peace regime negotiations, and thereby exclude Russia 
and Japan from the latter. 
 
-- PRAGMATIC REGIONAL VIEW WITH U.S. IN THE PICTURE:  In 
early comments about the ROK's relations with the two 
"whales," President Lee signaled that his government would be 
forward-looking and pragmatic, a shift from the 
historical-grievance mindset of his predecessor, Roh 
Moo-hyun.  In his inaugural speech in December, Lee said: 
"We will seek peace and mutual prosperity with our close 
neighbors, including Japan, China and Russia."  He has since 
announced the resumption of "shuttle diplomacy" (yearly 
leaders' visits in each direction) which he began with his 
April stop in Japan on the way back from Camp David.  Since 
 
Lee has also made it very clear that strengthening the 
"strategic alliance" with the United States is his highest 
priority, we need not be concerned about the ROK leaning 
toward regional arrangements that marginalize the U.S. 
 
-- SIX-PARTY EXPERIENCE BODES WELL FOR NEAPSM:  From the 
outset, the ROK has been an active and helpful player in the 
Six-Party Talks.  Behind the scenes, the Koreans have helped 
keep the wheels turning by conscientiously chairing the 
Economy and Energy Cooperation Working Group.  The NEAPSM 
Working Group, though chaired by Russia, has also benefited 
from ROK input.  For example, MOFAT officials ghost-wrote a 
concept paper that the Russian chair later circulated among 
member delegations.  Thus, the Koreans can be expected to 
pull their weight when a NEAPSM is established as an 
institution. 
 
¶19. (C) However, as for what such an institution might 
actually accomplish, Korean thinking often stops at the 38th 
parallel.  During the late Roh Administration, there was a 
naive hope that an end to the Korean War could be declared 
even before denuclearization, leading North Korea to feel 
secure enough to drop its nuclear program, thereby opening 
the road for regional peace.  The ROK public never bought 
that approach and the Lee Administration's view is far more 
sober, putting the denuclearization horse back in front of 
the peace regime cart.  The upshot is that the ROK sees 
broader peace in Northeast Asia as a long-term process 
because of North Korea's recalcitrance, and will be skeptical 
about what NEAPSM can realistically do, at least in the near 
term.  You may therefore want to start off by exploring with 
ROK officials the idea of getting NEAPSM off the ground with 
small confidence-building measures, such as the joint 
search-and-rescue operation that the South Koreans proposed 
at the first NEAPSM Working Group meeting in March 2007, or 
perhaps a coordinated NAEPSM approach to providing food aid 
and farming technology to North Korea. 
 
--------------- 
REGIONAL ISSUES 
--------------- 
 
¶20. (C) Tokyo is among the biggest beneficiaries of the 
change in the South Korean political climate.  President Lee 
has already met PM Fukuda twice.  In Tokyo just last week, 
Lee and Fukuda vowed to build a "new era" of improved 
relations.  They agreed to cooperate closely on North Korean 
nuclear and abduction issues, address global issues such as 
global warming and development assistance for poor countries, 
and enhance economic ties.  Also significant is their promise 
to each other to make frequent -- at least once a year -- 
reciprocal visits.  All of this is greatly helped by the 
gradual warming up of the South Korean public view of Japan, 
a significant departure from the Koizumi-Roh era when history 
and territory controversies put an enormous strain on 
Seoul-Tokyo ties.   You will certainly want to highlight -- 
and encourage -- the improving ROK-Japan relations, which is 
also an opportunity for enhanced trilateral cooperation on 
regional and global issues.  At Camp David, the President 
proposed a three-way, US-ROK-Japan, summit in Peru, on the 
margins of the APEC summit. 
 
¶21. (C) The Lee Myung-bak government's position on China is 
more nuanced.  Historically South Korea's protecting power, 
and now its biggest trading partner, China represents 
enormous opportunities and risks for Seoul.  Lee has chosen, 
quite wisely, what he calls "pragmatic diplomacy" with China. 
 That is, he wants to see economic relations prosper and 
political relations continue on a "friendly" basis.  This is 
easier said than done, because most Koreans are quite 
concerned, even intimidated by the rapid growth of Chinese 
influence in the region.  The most recent reminder was the 
Olympic torch relay in Seoul during which Chinese students 
violently attacked a group of South Koreans protesting 
China's position on human rights in North Korea and Tibet. 
South Koreans vocally condemned Chinese intimidation and were 
especially angry at Korean law enforcement for being too 
scared to control the Chinese.  Another source of underlying 
tension is that China is the ROK's foremost competitor for 
 
economic and political influence on North Korea.  Lee, like 
his predecessor Roh, is worried that Chinese trade and 
assistance dominate North Korean economic life, and that its 
investment is beginning buy up large parts of North Korean 
productive capacity.  Given these limits on Seoul-Beijing 
ties, I recommend that you assure the Koreans that Washington 
welcomes Lee's brand of pragmatic diplomacy with China; that 
we believe Seoul's strong alliance relationship with us is 
compatible with friendly Seoul-Beijing ties. 
 
---------------------------------- 
THE SOUTH KOREAN POLITICAL CLIMATE 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶22. (C) The collective political hangover from the recent 
Presidential (December 2007) and National Assembly Elections 
(April 2008) has yet to clear off, meaning the present 
domestic political situation is murky.  Although the 
conservatives won big in both elections, they won't take 
their National Assembly seats until the end of May.  In the 
meantime the country is wondering what Lee Myung-bak will do 
to fulfill his campaign pledge to revive the economy in the 
face of a global economic downturn.  The fate of his pet plan 
to build a network of canals across the Korean Peninsula is 
also uncertain.  Even before Lee's inauguration three of his 
cabinet nominees had to step down because of questions about 
their finances, and at the end of April a Blue House senior 
secretary resigned amid controversy surrounding possible 
 
SIPDIS 
ill-gotten wealth.  While some have used that opportunity to 
criticize him, in general Korean politicians of all stripes 
still appear to be feeling their way around with regard to 
how they should relate to the new president. 
 
¶23. (C) The 18th National Assembly convenes on May 29, but 
both the ruling Grand National Party (GNP) and the main 
opposition United Democratic Party (UDP) will change their 
leadership via party conventions in early July, likely 
getting in the way of any serious business getting done until 
mid-July.  President Lee called an unprecedented lame-duck 
special session (currently underway) in the Assembly that 
leaves office on May 25.  While some hold out hope the KORUS 
FTA will be passed during this session, most of our sources 
say there is little to no chance the outgoing assembly will 
give the new president (or the USG) that plum.  Political 
observers have commented that Lee's biggest challenge as 
President will be in learning how to work with the National 
Assembly and build public consensus for his initiatives -- 
skills he did not need in his previous incarnations as the 
powerful mayor of Seoul and a can-do corporate executive. 
The true test will come in late summer, when the new National 
Assembly is finally ready to get down to business.  The 
conservative-dominated assembly augurs well for Lee, but he 
will have to find a way to work with his critics both within 
the GNP and in opposition groups in order to accomplish his 
goals. 
 
¶24. (C) Right now the political planets are properly aligned. 
 In beef, Lee has shown that he is capable of delivering the 
goods.  In less than two months, he will be endowed with a 
much more friendly legislature.  But above all, the South 
Korea public continues show again and again that they support 
a closer relationship with the United States.  This coming 
series of high-level USG visits, which you kick off, is an 
opportunity to elevate our presence in the most strategic 
piece of real estate in northeast Asia. We look forward to 
seeing you on May 7. 
VERSHBOW
</file>