^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  08SEOUL1204  |  2008-06-16 10:04  |  기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PREL PINR KS KN }}  |
====== 제 목: 이 대통령의 격동의 시기, 그가 극복할까? ======
기 밀 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001204 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution ))

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 06/16/2018 
태그: PGOV (([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL (([External Political Relations])), PINR (([Intelligence])), KS (([Korea (South)])), KN (([Korea (North)] ))
제 목: 이 대통령의 격동의 시기 : 그가 극복할까?
참 조: 가. [[08seoul1145|SEOUL 001145]] 나. [[08seoul1153|SEOUL 001153]] 다. [[08seoul1174|SEOUL 001174]]

분류자: 대사 알렉산더 버쉬바우((번역 주:AMB Alexander S. Vershbow)). 근거 1.4 (b,d).
번역자: PoirotKr (번역 주: 트위터 사용자명)) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/10/14 22:04//
===== 요약 =====
1. (기밀) 요점: 이 대통령은 그의 5년 임기 중 이제 막 4개월 차에 들어섰다. 그리고 이미 역사상 가장 낮은 지지율을 기록하고 있는데 10% 안팎이다. 이명박에게 처음 100일간은 정치 현실을 체험하는 집중 훈련 기간이었다. 새 정부의 국정 운영에 대한 국민적 실망감에 더해 청와대가 여론을 무시한다는 인식이 정부를 사실상 절름발이로 만들었다. 6주 동안의 촛불 집회는 의사 결정을 마비시켰고 향후 수년에 걸칠 한국의 통치력에 대해 심각한 우려를 낳고 있다. 당내 불화가 격해짐에 더해 야당도 잃을 게 없는 처지라 이 모든 것들이 이 대통령에게는 통치력을 발휘하기 어렵게 만든다. 지난 한 달에 걸쳐 미국산 쇠고기 수입 재개 결정은 남한 국민이 그들의 감정을 표출하는 매개체 역할을 하였다. 이 대통령은 이 거센 풍파를 통과할 때까지는 그에 대한 신뢰성을 회복할 수 없다. 그리고 우리는 미국의 마지노선을 넘지 않으면서도 이명박이 쇠고기 문제를 해소하도록 도와줄 필요가 있다. 우리는 올해 말까지 미 의회가 한미 FTA를 비준하도록 총력을 다함으로써 애초 쇠고기에 대한 이명박의 결정이 정당화되도록 도와야 한다.

2. (기밀) 그렇다 하더라도, 이명박은 국내 의제 문제나 방위비 분담금 특별협정과 기지 반환, 주한미군 재배치, 자유무역협정의 국회 비준 가능성 등 잠재적으로 논란을 살만한 일단의 한미 동맹 문제에 대해 진척을 이루기가 어렵다고 생각할 것이다. 대량살상무기 확산방지구상뿐만 아니라 이라크와 아프가니스탄 돕기 국제 노력에 한국의 참여를 증진하려는 노력도 가까운 장례에 더욱 어렵게 될 공산이 커졌다. 우리가 지금의 거센 풍파를 견디어 낼지라도 "21세기 한미동맹"에 대한 기대를 하향 조정할 필요가 있을 수 있다. 왜냐면 이명박이 앞으로 한동안 절름발이 지도자가 될 것이기 때문이다. 요점 끝
===== 들어서자마자 닥친 봉변 =====
3. (기밀) 이명박은 최고경영자의 본능을 활용해 내각과 청와대를 "최고 중 최고"로 채웠다고 하지만, 그 대신에 그는 시작부터 귀족 자격을 인증했다고 조롱받는 엘리트 집단을 불러들였다. 취임하기 전부터 이명박이 내각 인선으로 비판을 받은 까닭은 내정자 다수가 이명박의 소망 교회 사람들과 모교인 고려대 동문, 그의 고향 지역인 경상도 출신이기 때문이다. 정부 공직자에게 적용되는 의무적으로 공개된 정보에 의하면 이명박의 각료는 그들의 전임자들보다 거의 두 배 부자다. 진보 언론사는 이명박이 진정 평범한 한국인의 이해관계를 가슴에 새기고 있는지 의심의 씨앗을 심기 시작했다. 특히 그가 내정한 4명의 인사가 윤리적 과실 혐의와 불법 부동산 투기로 인해 인사청문회 과정 중에 낙마해야 했다. 인선 문제는 청와대 사회정책 수석이 불법 땅 투기 협의로 어쩔 수 없이 사임하게 되면서 5월에도 반복되었다. (주석: 현 고위급 청와대 직원의 평균 재산 보유액이 미화 400만 달러이다. 주석 끝.)
===== 보수의 분열=====
4. (기밀) 이 대통령은 국민적 공감대를 구축하는 데 실패했을 뿐만 아니라 보수층을 결속하지 못하면서 계속해서 이명박 정부를 괴롭히고 있다. 비록 이명박이 전례 없는 큰 격차로 12월 대선에서 승리했지만, (그의 최대 경쟁자가 26.3% 득표했지만, 이명박은 48.7%의 득표율) 그는 당내 경선에서 간신히 대권 후보가 될 수 있었다. 그의 경쟁자인 박근혜가 당내에서 많은 지지도를 유지하고 있을 뿐만 아니라 나라 안에서도 엄청난 대중적 인기를 확보하고 있다. 이명박과 그의 최측근들은 박근혜와 협력해서 한나라당을 결속하는 게 아니라 박근혜에 충성하는 정치인들을 4월 9일 총선 후보 공천에서 배제하는 작업을 하였다. 이명박은 박근혜 지지자들을 배제하는 데 성공했지만, 이명박이 공천 과정에 직접 개입함에 더해 격렬한 내분으로 전통적인 보수층이 이명박에게서 등을 돌리게 되는 원인이 되었다. 계속되는 박근혜와의 내분으로 말미암아 이명박이 자기 생각에 반기를 들만한 자들과는 협력할 용의가 없다는 인상을 주고 있다. 한나라당은 미약한 원내 다수 의석을 확보하는 데 그쳤는데―299석 중의 153석―이는 한나라당이 많게는 200석 이상으로 승리할 거라는 애초의 예측을 크게 못 미친 결과다; 한나라당 외곽의 보수 후보들이 추가로 47석을 얻었는데 특히 박근혜의 지지자로 대변되는 보수층 유권자들이 친이계가 지배하는 한나라당에 대해 진저리가 났음을 보여주고 있다.

===== 선거의 앙금 =====
5. (기밀) 12월 대통령 선거에서 넘어온 쟁점들이 대중의 불만을 계속 자극하고 있다. 가장 주목되는 사실은 경제에 활력을 불어넣겠다는 이명박의 공약이 세계 경제 침체 속에서 갈수록 현실화하기가 어렵다. 이명박은 7% 경제 성장률을 약속하면서 당선됐지만, 예로 국제 유가와 식량 가격 상승, 미국 경제의 둔화 등 거시 경제 요인 때문에 그가 약속한 성장률을 어쩔 수 없이 하향 조정해왔다. 예로 한국인 노동자와 학생의 주식인 라면과 같은 일상 용품 가격이 상승해왔다; 휘발유 가격도 갤런당 10 미불에 달했는데 트럭 운전사와 통근자 영세사업가들의 원성을 사고 있다; 그리고 성장 전망도 하향 조정되고 있다. 이명박이 내놓은 정책들이(예로 50개의 민생과 관련된 기초 생필품 가격을 점검하겠다는 시도들) 불충분하고 지나친 간섭이며 순전히 정치적이라는 비판을 받아왔다. 또한, 이명박은 규제를 손봐서 한국 재벌 기업의 투자를 활성화하겠다는 노력도 지배 계층을 상대로 한 그의 정책은 중하위 계층의 처지를 무시하는 등 거의 국민적 우려를 불식시키지 못했다.

6. (기밀) 이명박은 그가 주도한 정책 중 어떤 것도 국민적 동의를 구하지 못하고 있다. 그는 애초에 전문가나 국민에게 자문하지 않은 채 몇 가지 새 정책들을 발표한 결과 그의 구상들이 “미숙”하고 “아마추어적”이라고 조롱을 받고 있다. 좋은 예로 한국의 교육 제도를 개혁하겠다는 이명박의 노력에서 잘 나타난다―특히 그가 영어로 가르치는 고등학교 학급의 수를 대폭 늘리겠다는 구상이 특히 그렇다. 전문가와 상의하기도 전에 정책을 발표한 결과 자격을 갖춘 강사가 부족하다는 사정 등 이명박 정책의 문제만 도드라지고 말았다. 또한, 이명박은 국민이 관심사를 대통령에게 전달할 수 있도록 물리적인 포럼과 온라인 포럼 사이트를 개설하겠다는 공약도 역시 실천하지 못했다. 그는 실제로 최고 경영자를 위해 핫라인을 개설함으로써 그는 오직 지배 계급의 이해관계에만 마음을 쓰고 있다는 인식을 강화했다.

7. (기밀) 이명박의 야심 찬 국토 횡단 대운하 사업을 둘러싼 논란이 쇠고기 문제가 정점으로 치닫고 있던 5월 말에 다시 불거졌다. 국민 67%가 대운하를 반대한다는 사실에도 이명박 취임 이후 얼마 되지도 않아 당시 국토해양부 장관 내정자가 틀림없이 대운하 사업을 착수할 거라고 발언하면서 가열된 비판을 촉발하였다. 이명박은 나중에 대운하 건설을 연기할 거라거나 한나라당은 한 걸음 더 나아가 총선을 앞두고 당의 공약에서 누락하겠다고 까지 했다. 그러나 3월 말과 5월 초에도 한국 정부가 운하 사업을 포기할 의도가 없었다는 게 드러나면서 이명박 정부가 국민의 목소리에 경청하길 거부한다는 대중의 비난이 쇄도하고 있다.
===== 잘 못 처리한 쇠고기 =====
8. (기밀) 만일 이런 모든 문제가 이명박의 초기 국정 수행에 대한 불만족으로 귀결되었다면 미국산 쇠고기 시장 재개방 결정과 이명박 정부가 쇠고기 문제를 잘못 취급한 것이 국민 여론을 자극한 기폭제 역할이었음을 증명해 준다. 인수위 기간과 새 정부 초기에 쇠고기 문제의 나아갈 방향을 생각하면서, 이 대통령은 몇 가지 중요 목표가 있었다: 노무현 정부가 우리 측과 조용히 논의했던 내용과 대체로 부합하는 합의를 이루고, 4월 9일 총선 이후까지 협상 내용의 공개적인 발표를 미룬다; 그리고 한국 쇠고기 산업의 적응을 돕기 위한 지원 대책들을 준비한다(국내 쇠고기 산업이 반대의 주요 원천이 될 것으로 예상). 그러나 미국산 쇠고기의 안전과 관련해 다수의 의문점이 여전하다는 정부의 기존 입장이 바뀐 것에 대해 한국민으로 하여금 적응토록 하는 대비가 불충분했다. 외교통상부는 자체 역할을 미국 정부와의 쇠고기 협상으로 보았던 까닭에 대비가 불충분했고; 농림수산식품부는 수입 개방을 끝까지 차단하려 했던 까닭에 대비가 불충분했고; 청와대도 비용을 절감을 이유로 노무현 정부로부터 승계받은 많은 대민/대언론 소통 기능을 해체함으로써 스스로 발목이 잡힌 까닭에 대비가 불충분했다. 한국민이 보기에 미국산 쇠고기에 대한 한국 정부의 극적인 공식 입장 변화는 한 주간에 걸친 힘든 협상 끝에 나왔다는 점에 더해 이 대통령이 부시 대통령과의 회담 전날 밤에 협상 타결이 이뤄졌다는 점에서 이명박이 역사적인 캠프 데이비드 정상회담을 만끽하기 위해 국민의 안전 문제는 내팽개쳤음을 방증하는 것으로 보였다.

9. (기밀) 쇠고기 협상 타결이 발표되고 국민의 의견 수렴을 위해 공개된 이후에(입법예고 공고 이후) 일부 한국민 특유의 특성이 투영되는 방식으로 반대 여론이 갑자기 커진 것이다. 미국산 쇠고기의 안전성에 대해 잘못된 정보 상당수가 광범위한 정치 의제를 보유한 시민단체 활동가들이 퍼 나르고 휴대폰 문자 메시지의 형태로 유포되었다(이 문자 메시지는 많은 한국 젊은이들 사이에서 기존의 언론 매체보다도 더 신뢰성을 구가하는데 "독립" 매체였기 때문이다). 학생들은 초기 쇠고기 집회에서 지배적인 역할을 했다. 그들은 미국산 쇠고기가 (이명박이 애초에 주장한 바대로) 소비자의 선택 문제가 아니라고 항변한 까닭은 학생들은 광우병에 걸렸다는 미국산 쇠고기를 학생 식당(그리고 군부대)에서 주는 대로 선택의 여지 없이 먹어야 하기 때문이다. 미국산 쇠고기에 관한 우려가 학생으로부터 주류 인구로 번지는 과정에서 정부의 실책이 상황을 악화하였다. <wrap hi>농림수산식품부 관리들은 청문회 중에 쇠고기 합의 전문에 대해 확실히 숙지하지 못한 터였고 협상 중에 사용된 영문을 이해하지 못해 혼선이 불거졌다고 했다―둘 다 틀린 주장이며 (협상은 순차 통역을 수반해서 행해졌다.) 그 결과로 나온 양국의 합의문 내용에 대한 국민적 신뢰를 구축하는 방식도 못 된다.</wrap><WRAP center round info 90%>//**소위 "강화된 동물성 사료 금지 조치" 관련 미국 관보 "오역 논란?" 그냥 거짓말이란 소리**//
…(상략) 애초 정부는 미국이 강화된 동물성 사료 금지 조치를 내놓는 시점에 30개월령 미국산 쇠고기를 전면 수입하기로 합의했다. 이상길 단장을 비롯한 정부 관계자는 "이런 조치가 우리가 미국을 압박해 얻어낸 성과"라고 주장했다. 특히 정부는 "미국은 30개월 미만 소라도 도축 검사에 합격하지 못하면 닭, 돼지의 사료로 사용하지 않는다"고 밝혔다. 그러나 4월 25일 미국 관보에 발표된 미국의 조치는 이런 정부의 설명과 다르다. 미국의 관보를 보면, 도축 검사에 합격하지 못해 식용으로 부적합한 30개월 미만의 소는 뇌와 척수의 제거와 상관없이 사료 금지 물질로 보지 않는다. (중략)… 애초 농림부는 지난 5월 2일 "미국은 30개월 미만의 소라 하더라도 도축 검사에 합격하지 않은 소의 경우 돼지 사료용으로 사용을 금지하고 있어, 사료로 인한 광우병 감염 가능성은 거의 없다"고 밝혔다. 미국 정부가 1주일 전에 내놓은 관보의 내용도 제대로 확인하지 않고 국민을 상대로 거짓말을 한 것이다. [[http://www.pressian.com/news/article.html?no=88665|"<100분 토론> 해석 공방…송기호가 옳았다"]] //프레시안// [[http://www.pressian.com/news/article.html?no=90112|'美 사료조치' 논란…"오역 아니라 '알면서' 조작"]] //프레시안//
</WRAP>
 
10. (기밀) 최소한 이명박의 소속당 한나라당 동조 세력이 5월 30일에 국회를 장악하기 전까지는 쇠고기 문제를 점잖게 무시하면 이로운 상황이었지만, 이명박은 그 대신에 4월 레임덕 회기에 들어선 국회를 통해 FTA 비준을 관철하는 과정에서 당시 원내 다수당이던 야당 통합민주당으로 하여금 한미 쇠고기 합의에 맞서 거창하게 반대할 극적인 소재를 제공함에 더해 쇠고기 합의 재협상을 주장할 여건을 제공하였다. 시위자들에게 물대포 세례를 한 것도 과거 정부들의 좋지 않은 기억들을 환기하였고 시위자로 하여금 스스로 한국 민주주의 투사로 내세울 수 있도록 했다.

11. (기밀) 이명박 정부는 자청해서 쇠고기 문제를 올바르게 처리하려고 애쓰면서 시위자와 야당, 한나라당 모두에서 터져 나오는 쇠고기 재협상 요구에 저항해왔다. 이명박과 그의 최고위 참모들은 임시 방책이 나오는 즉시 이번 위기를 일단락 짓고 미국산 쇠고기의 안전성에 대해 한국민을 교육할 수 있으며 쇠고기 시장을 전면 재개방하고 한미 FTA 비준 채비를 한다는 믿음은 변함없었다. 그러나 이명박 정부 내부가 대체로 전열이 흐트러져 있고 거리에서 혼돈 상태, 시위자들이 이명박 자체를 문제 삼기 시작한 사실 등 이런 모든 것들이 정부가 자체 입장을 방어하고 시위자들이 제기한 혐의에 맞서는 일을 어렵게 만들었다. 대신에 정부는 새로 불거지는 혐의를 해소한다고 하지만, 시민 단체들의 수시로 바뀌는 요구를 쫓아가기 바쁜 자신의 모습을 발견하게 되었다. "광우병범국민대책회의" 소속 민간단체들은(그들 중 다수는 한미 FTA에도 반대하고 있고 쇠고기 협상을 죽이는 일이 워싱턴 정가에서 한미 FTA를 침몰시키는 최상의 방책 중의 하나라고 보고 있고 동 단체가 한국에서 국민 다수의 지지를 계속해서 구가하고 있는 까닭에) 이명박이 뜻을 굽혀 쇠고기 협상의 폐기 및/또는 공식적으로 재협상을 요청하기 전까지는 만족하지 않을 것이다. 그들의 우려를 해소하려는 이명박 정부의 선의 노력은 이들 단체의 기를 살려줬을 뿐이다. 마찬가지로 분명한 점은 가장 민감한 쇠고기 상품에 대한 임시적인 수출 제한 조치에 합의하는 등 이명박이 이 문제의 임시적 해결책을 찾도록 시도해야 한다. 물론 미국의 마지노선을 넘지 않아야 한다. 쇠고기 정국이 어떻게 해결되건 간에 앞으로 한동안은 이명박 정부의 통치에 대한 비판을 공고히 해서 이명박의 힘을 빼는 동시에 그의 반대자들의 슬로건을 제공할 것이다.
===== 이명박 허둥대고 있다 =====
12. (기밀) 최근의 쇠고기 문제를 두고 분출되는 반감은 남한 사람들이 이명박 정부를 상대로 누적된 불만을 토로할 수 있게 해주는 하나의 슬로건이 되었다. 이번 민초들의 시위는 한국 정부가 미국과의 강한 유대를 유지한다는 생각에 빠져 국민 건강의 희생을 마다치 않는다는 하나의 의식에 대부분 초점이 맞춰져 있다. 대부분 진보적인 시민단체, 노동계와 농민 단체가 시위 주관 단체인데 그들은 명백히 잘못된 혐의를 미국산 쇠고기에 씌워 오도하고 있으며 그런 주장은 몇몇 좌파 경영자가 지배하는 TV 방송국에서 방영된 터무니 없이 편파적인 다큐멘터리에 힘입은 것이다. 슬프게도, 많은 한국인이 해당 혐의 제기를 신뢰한다. 왜냐면 이명박 정부에 대한 신뢰도가 무척 낮기 때문이다. 교육받은 한국인들은 어리석지 않으며 해당 혐의가 비과학적이라고 거부한다. 그러나 이명박이 쇠고기 시장 개방을 너무 서두르는 심각한 실책을 범했다는 게 그들의 견해이다. 상황을 더욱 폭발적일 수밖에 없었던 것은 다름 아닌 미국산 쇠고기라는 점과 캠프 데이비드 회담을 불과 몇 시간을 앞두고 쇠고기 협정이 타결되었다는 점이다. 이 대통령이 미국 정부에 머리들 조아린다는 인식이 좌파와 민족주의자들이 시위에서 널리 활용하는 테마이긴 하지만, 반미주의는 주류 시위자들이 결집하도록 하는 주요 원인이 아니라 오히려 이명박 반대가 원인이다.

13. (기밀) 야당인 통합민주당은 대통령 선거와 국회의원 선거에서 완패한 이후에 대중의 지지를 호소하기 위한 방책을 고심하던 차에 자당의 지지 기반 강화라는 희망을 품고 쇠고기 문제를 움켜쥐었다. 통합민주당은 한국 정부가 쇠고기 문제를 재협상하기 전까지는 진행 중인 18대 국회 보이콧을 끝내지 않을 거라고 주장해왔다. 야당은 쇠고기 문제를 활용해 이명박 정부와 미국 정부를 (잘못 인용하고) 비판하며 소속 의원들을 화려한 무대 전면으로 복귀시키고 있다. 그러나 이들이 시위대의 이명박 하야 요구에는 합세하지도 않았고 탄핵 소추 구상도 전혀 거론하지 않는다는 점은 눈에 띄는 대목이다. 흥미롭게도 통합민주당의 이 모든 엄포에도 호응이 없다; 통합민주당의 지지율이 여전히 20%대에 머무르고 있다.

14. (기밀) 아마도 더 불안스러운 점은 계속되는 시위로 말미암아 한국민이 헌법과 법치주의를 존중하는지에 진정 의문을 제기한다는 점이다. 많은 한국인은 이들 시위자를 식자 관측통들이 우려를 표명하듯이 대중에 의한 통치가 아니라 찬란한 민주주의 모범 사례라고 여기고 있다는 점이다. 한국 정부를 멈춰 세울만한 (상당수는 너무 어려서 투표할 수 없는) 수천 명의 시위대의 역량은 여타 국제적인 협상에 나서는 한국인의 신뢰도를 위협할 것이다. 더욱 심각한 것은 여전히 한국 통치력에 미칠 장기적인 파급력이 존재한다는 점이다. 좌파든 우파든 모든 한국인은 쇠고기 히스테리가 “군중”에 권력을 부여할 위험이 있다고 심각한 우려를 표명하기 시작했다. 한국 정부가 일부 통제력을 되찾지 못한다면 대화 상대역 중 다수는 시위가 국가 정책을 결정지을 규범이 될 거라는 암울한 전망을 하고 있다.

===== 한미동맹 제자리걸음? =====
15. (기밀) 쇠고기 문제가 앞으로 몇 달 동안 한미 관계에 심대한 영향을 미칠 것이다. 첫째, 이명박과 그의 참모들이 진행 중인 한미 현안에 어떤 진전을 생각하기에 앞서 이명박 정부에 대한 대내 신뢰를 재건해야만 한다. 한국 정부 대화 상대역들이 믿는 바는 한국 정부가 논란을 사는 한미동맹 관련 협정을 서두른다면 그동안 시위자들이 애써 꺼리던 초기 반미주의의 포문이 열리게 될 수 있다는 점이다. 이미 한국 정부는 진행 중인 모든 동맹 쟁점들을 신중을 기해 추후로 미루고 있다. 지난 2주간 한국 측은 몇몇 한미 회담을 연기했는데―정례 전략적 파트너십을 위한 전략협의회, 방위비 분담금 특별협정 협상의 다음 일정, 주한미군 기지의 반환 관련 환경 문제에 관한 회담 등이다. 방위비 분담 특별협정과 기지 반환은 한국민에게 가장 민감한 두 가지 한미동맹 쟁점이다. 한국의 예산 지출이 소요됨에 따라 앞선 사례에서 "미국에 굴종적이다"는 상당한 비판을 야기한 바 있다. 한국 국민이 미국의 “희망 사항”으로 꼽는 아프간과 이라크 파병 연장이나 지속적인 주둔뿐만 아니라 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(PSI) 참여 등은 중단기적으로 진전을 보기 어렵다고 입증될 것이다.
===== 논평 =====
16. (기밀) 쇠고기 사태는 이명박에게 악몽이다. 간단히 말해서 그는 지금 무엇을 해야 할지 모르고 있다. 그가 시위대에 항복하면 남은 이명박 정부 56개월 동안 절름발이 신세가 될 수 있음을 그는 알고 있다. 그러나 시위대의 요구를 무시한다면 고통을 연장할 뿐이고 더욱 취약해 보일 뿐이다. 그가 택한 진로는 양다리를 걸치는 것이다: 군중에게 고개를 조아려 사과함에 더해 쇠고기 합의의 몇 가지 요소를 수정하면서도, 미국에서 한미 FTA 비준 기회를 날릴 공산을 키우게 될 전면적인 쇠고기 재협상으로 내달리지 않는 길이다. 추가로 그는 내각 개편과 청와대 고위직 개편을 단행할 것이다. 그런 후에, 이명박은 자신의 신뢰를 회복하는 장기적 프로세스를 시작해야 한다. 이러한 각본의 핵심은 국회로부터 상당한 도움을 얻어내야 하는 것으로 그것이 가능해지려면 그는 박근혜로 대변되는 동료 보수 세력과 권력을 공유해야만 한다.

17. (기밀) 이 시점에 이명박을 당장 위기에서 벗어나도록 하려면 미국의 도움이 필요하다. 우리의 첫 번째 과제는 국내 주류 비평가들에게 먹힐만한 쇠고기 일괄 조치에 합의함으로써 이명박의 끝 모를 추락을 반드시 막아야만 한다. 그가 사임하지 않는 이상 극단주의자를 만족하게 할 수는 없다. 동시에 상황이 안정되기 전까지는 방위비 분담금 특별협정과 기지 반환과 같은 양국의 민감한 현안을 추후로 미룰 준비를 해야만 한다. 중장기적으로 볼 때 우리가 한미 FTA 미 의회 비준을 추진하기 위해 총체적인 노력을 기울임으로써 이명박이 내렸던 애초의 용감한 결단을 반드시 지지하고 명분을 쌓아줘야 할 것이다. 우리가 한미 FTA 비준에 실패한다면 이명박 정권을 가장 확실하게 더욱 취약하게 만들 것이다. 장기적으로 볼 때 이명박이 쇠고기 히스테리로 겪은 피해는 우리가 캠프 데이비드에서 출범시킨 “21세기 전략적 동맹”에 대한 우리의 기대를 재평가할 필요가 있을 정도다. 왜냐면 이명박 정부가 현재와 같은 추세를 벗어나지 못한다면 우리는 앞으로 오랫동안 절름발이 동맹국을 감당해야 할 것이다.
버시바우
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 07SEOUL1204.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001204 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KS KN
SUBJECT: TURBULENT TIMES FOR PRESIDENT LEE: CAN HE RECOVER? 
 
REF: A. SEOUL 001145 
     ¶B. SEOUL 001153 
     ¶C. SEOUL 001174 
 
Classified By: AMB Alexander S. Vershbow.  Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: President Lee Myung-bak is only four months 
into his five-year term in office and already he has hit 
historically low popularity ratings of around 10 percent. 
Lee's first 100 days have been a crash course in political 
reality.  The public's disappointment with the new 
administration's handling of state affairs and perception 
that the Blue House disregards public opinion have virtually 
crippled the administration, and the six weeks of candlelight 
vigils have paralyzed decision-making, raising real concerns 
about Korea's governability in the years ahead.  Bitter 
intra-party feuding and an opposition with nothing to lose 
have all made it harder for President Lee to exert control. 
Over the past month, the decision to restart imports of U.S. 
beef has become the vehicle through which South Koreans are 
expressing their anger.  President Lee cannot rebuild his 
credibility until this storm passes, and we need to help Lee 
defuse the beef issue without crossing our red lines.  We 
should also help vindicate his original decision on beef by 
making an all-out effort to get the KORUS FTA ratified by 
Congress by year end. 
 
¶2.  (C) Even then, Lee will find it difficult to make 
progress on his domestic agenda or on a host of potentially 
controversial alliance issues, including the Special Measures 
Agreement (SMA) negotiations, camp returns, USFK relocation, 
and possibly FTA ratification by the National Assembly. 
Efforts to promote robust ROK participation in international 
efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan as well as the Proliferation 
Security Initiative (PSI) are also likely to become much more 
difficult for the foreseeable future.  Even if we weather 
this storm, we may need to lower expectations for the "21st 
Century Alliance," since Lee will be a crippled leader for 
some time to come.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
Problems Out of the Gate 
------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C) Lee used his CEO instincts to staff the cabinet and 
the Blue House with the "best of the best" but instead he 
brought in an elite team that was derided from the get-go for 
their patrician credentials.  Even before taking office, Lee 
was criticized for his cabinet choices, as many of his 
nominees came from wealthy backgrounds -- most were members 
of Lee's church, alumni of his alma mater Korea University, 
and from his home province of Gyeongsang. According to a 
mandatory disclosure report for government officials, members 
of Lee's cabinet were almost twice as wealthy as their 
predecessors.  Progressive press began to sow doubts that Lee 
genuinely had the average South Korean's interests at heart, 
especially when four of his appointees had to step down 
during nomination hearings due to allegations of ethical 
lapses and illegal real estate speculation.  Personnel 
problems continued in May when Lee's Blue House Chief of 
Social Policy was forced to resign under charges of illegal 
land speculation.  (NOTE: The current top staff members in 
the Blue House have an average net worth of around 4 million 
USD. END NOTE.) 
 
------------------- 
Conservatives Split 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Not only has President Lee failed to build public 
consensus, but his failure to unite the conservatives 
continues to dog his administration.  Although Lee won an 
unprecedented margin of victory in the December presidential 
election (48.7 percent of the vote to 26.3 percent for his 
closest rival), he had only eked out his party's nomination 
in the presidential primary.  His rival, Park Geun-hye, 
retains a great amount of support within the party as well as 
enormous popular appeal in the country.  Instead of working 
with Park to unite the Grand National Party (GNP), Lee and 
his top aides worked to exclude politicians loyal to Park 
 
SEOUL 00001204  002 OF 005 
 
 
from gaining nominations in the April 9 National Assembly 
election.  Lee was successful in excluding some Park 
loyalists, but his direct involvement in the nomination 
process and the bitter infighting caused many traditional 
conservatives to turn away from Lee.  Continued infighting 
with Park gave the impression that he was unwilling to work 
with those who might oppose his ideas.  The GNP only obtained 
a slim majority -- 153 seats out of 299 -- far short of 
earlier predictions that projected the GNP winning as many as 
200 seats; conservative candidates outside the GNP won an 
additional 47 seats, demonstrating that conservative voters, 
especially Park Geun-hye supporters, were fed up with the GNP 
controlled by President Lee's faction. 
 
---------------- 
Election Baggage 
---------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Issues held over from the December presidential 
election continue to spur public frustration.  Most notably, 
Lee's promises to supercharge the economy are increasingly 
difficult to realize in a slowing global economy.  Lee was 
elected on his pledge to grow the economy by seven percent, 
but has been forced to dial down his promises because of 
larger economic factors at play, such as rising world oil and 
food prices and a slowing U.S. economy.  Prices for everyday 
goods such as ramen noodles (a staple food for working 
Koreans and students) have gone up; gasoline is about USD 10 
per gallon, angering truckers, commuters and small business 
owners; and growth projections are being lowered.  The 
policies Lee has announced (such as efforts to monitor the 
prices of 50 basic goods related to public welfare) have been 
criticized as being insufficient, overly interventionist, and 
purely political.  Additionally, Lee's efforts to revise 
regulations to boost investment by Korea's chaebol businesses 
have done little to assuage public concern that his policies 
are targeted toward the elite and ignore the plight of the 
middle and lower classes. 
 
¶6.  (C) Lee has yet to succeed in obtaining public buy-in for 
any of his policy initiatives.  He has announced several new 
policies without apparently first consulting experts or the 
public, which has resulted in his ideas being derided and 
called "half-baked" and "amateur."  The best example of this 
is Lee's effort to reform Korea's education system -- 
specifically his efforts to dramatically increase the number 
of high school classes taught in English.  His failure to 
consult with experts before making the announcement resulted 
in glaring problems with the initiative, including a dearth 
of qualified instructors.  Lee also failed to carry out his 
campaign promise to set up physical and online sites as 
forums for the public to communicate concerns to the 
President.  He did manage to establish a hotline for top 
executives to speak directly to the president, reinforcing 
perceptions that Lee has only the elite's interest at heart. 
 
¶7.  (C) Controversy surrounding Lee's ambitious cross-country 
Grand Canal project resurfaced at the end of May just as the 
beef controversy was coming to a head.  Despite the fact that 
67 percent of the public disapproved of the canal, shortly 
after Lee's inauguration the then minister-designate for Land 
and Oceans sparked heated criticism by stating that he would 
definitely undertake the project.  Lee later suggested that 
he would postpone construction and his party even went so far 
as to drop it from its platform ahead of the general 
election.  In late March and again in early May, however, 
revelations that the ROKG had no intention of abandoning the 
canal project intensified public condemnation that the Lee 
Administration refused to listen to the voice of the people. 
 
---------------- 
Mismanaging Beef 
---------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) If all these issues led to a sense of dissatisfaction 
with Lee's early performance, the decision to reopen the 
market to U.S. beef, and the government's mishandling of the 
issue, proved to be a catalyst that galvanized Korean public 
opinion.  In thinking about moving forward on beef during the 
transition and early days of the new administration, Lee had 
 
SEOUL 00001204  003 OF 005 
 
 
several key goals:  to proceed with an agreement that was 
largely in line with what the Roh Administration had quietly 
discussed with us, to wait until after the April 9 
legislative elections to publicly announce the negotiations; 
and to prepare a set of support measures to help the Korean 
beef industry (which was expected to be the principal source 
of opposition) to adjust.  However, not enough was done to 
prepare the Korean public for the move from the government's 
historic position (that many questions remained about the 
safety of U.S. beef) -- not by MOFAT, which saw its role as 
negotiating the deal with the USG; not by the Agricultural 
Ministry, which continued to hope to the end that the market 
would remain closed; and not by the Blue House, which had 
further tied its hands by dismantling much of the public and 
media outreach operations it inherited from the Roh 
Government, in the interest of cost-cutting.   To the Korean 
public, the dramatic shift in the ROKG's public posture on 
U.S. beef, coming at the end of a tough week-long negotiation 
and concluding the night before President Lee was to meet 
with President Bush, seemed to demonstrate that the safety 
concerns of the Korean public were being tossed aside so Lee 
could enjoy an historic summit at Camp David. 
 
¶9.  (C) After the beef deal was announced and released for 
public comment, public opposition quickly grew in a way that 
reflected some uniquely Korean characteristics. 
Misinformation about the safety of U.S. beef, much of it 
peddled by activist groups with a broader political agenda, 
was disseminated on cell phone text messages (which for many 
Korean youths have more credibility than established media, 
since they are "independent").  Students played a dominant 
role in the early protests, saying that eating U.S. beef 
wasn't a matter of consumer choice (as Lee had early-on 
argued) since students would have no choice but to eat the 
allegedly BSE-infected U.S. beef that Korean school 
cafeterias (and military messes) would serve.  As concern 
about U.S. beef spread from students to the mainstream 
population, the government's missteps exacerbated the 
situation.  Agriculture Ministry officials, uncertain about 
the text of the beef agreement during a parliamentary 
hearing, suggested that their confusion stemmed from not 
understanding the English language used during the 
negotiation -- both incorrect (the negotiations were 
conducted with consecutive interpretation) and hardly a way 
to build public confidence in the bilateral agreement that 
ensued. 
 
¶10. (C) While the beef issue would probably have benefited 
from some benign neglect -- at least until Lee's GNP allies 
took control of the National Assembly on May 30 -- the Lee 
Government instead proceeded with its efforts to force FTA 
ratification through the National Assembly in a May lame-duck 
session, providing the opposition United Democratic Party 
(UDP), in majority at the time, a spectacular platform to 
grandstand against the beef deal and insist that it be 
renegotiated.  Turning water cannons on the protestors 
brought back unpleasant memories of past governments, and 
enabled the protestors to present themselves as fighters for 
Korean democracy. 
 
¶11.  (C) To its credit, the Lee Government has tried to do 
the right thing on beef, and has resisted the calls for 
renegotiation of the beef deal that have come in from 
protestors, the political opposition, and the GNP alike.  Lee 
and his top advisors continue to believe that once a 
temporary solution is found, a line can be drawn under this 
crisis, the Korean public can be educated about the safety of 
U.S. beef, the market fully reopened, and the KORUS FTA teed 
up for ratification.  However, the general disarray within 
the government, the chaos in the streets, and the fact that 
the protestors have made Lee himself the issue, have all made 
it difficult for the government to defend its position and 
challenge the allegations of the protestors.  Instead, the 
government has found itself chasing after the moving 
goalposts of NGO demands, trying to address each new 
allegation as it arises.  It is clear the NGO groups in the 
"BSE Beef Alliance" (many of whom are also opposed to the 
KORUS FTA, and see killing the beef deal as one of their best 
ways to sink the FTA in Washington, since it continues to 
enjoy majority support in Korea) will not be content until 
 
SEOUL 00001204  004 OF 005 
 
 
Lee backs down and abrogates the beef deal (and/or formally 
requests renegotiation).  The Lee Government's good-faith 
efforts to address their concerns have only emboldened these 
groups.  It is equally clear that while we should try to help 
Lee find a temporary solution to this problem -- including 
agreeing to temporary limitations on export of the most 
sensitive beef products, without crossing any red lines -- no 
matter how the beef situation is resolved, it has 
crystallized a critique of Lee's governance that will weaken 
him, and provide a rallying cry for his opponents, for some 
time to come. 
 
------------------ 
Lee is Floundering 
------------------ 
 
¶12.  (C) The recent outpouring of disapproval over the beef 
issue has become the rallying cry enabling South Koreans to 
express their cumulative frustration with the Lee 
Administration.  The grassroots protests have focused mostly 
on a sense that the government was willing to sacrifice the 
health of the people in the interest of maintaining strong 
ties to the U.S.  Protest organizers, mostly progressive 
civic groups, organized labor and farm groups, have made 
misleading and outright false charges against American beef, 
aided by several outrageously slanted documentaries on state 
TV networks still dominated by leftist management.  Sadly, 
many Koreans find these charges credible, because the 
credibility of the Lee Administration is so low.  Educated 
Koreans do know better and reject these allegations as being 
unscientific.  Still, they are of the view that Lee made a 
serious mistake in rushing to open the beef market.  What 
makes the situation much more inflammable is that this was 
American beef and the agreement was reached hours before the 
Camp David summit.  The perception that President Lee was 
kowtowing to Washington is a theme much used by leftists and 
nationalists in the protest, but anti-Americanism is not the 
principal draw for the mainstream protesters; rather, it's 
anti-Lee. 
 
¶13.  (C) The opposition United Democratic Party (UDP), 
struggling to find a mode of popular appeal after resounding 
defeats in both the presidential and the National Assembly 
elections, has seized on the beef issue in hopes of boosting 
its own support base.  The UDP has demanded that the ROKG 
renegotiate the beef issue before the party will end its 
ongoing boycott of the 18th National Assembly.  The 
opposition has used the beef issue to thrust its members back 
into the limelight, criticizing (and misquoting) both the Lee 
Administration and the U.S. Government.  They have, however, 
notably not joined in the protesters' demands that Lee be 
removed from office and have not even floated the idea of 
impeachment proceedings.  Interestingly, all its bluster has 
gotten it nowhere; UDP support ratings still hover around 20 
percent. 
 
¶14.  (C) Perhaps even more disturbingly, the ongoing protests 
do call into question Koreans' respect for the rule of law 
and their own constitution.  Many Koreans view these protests 
as a shining exemplar of democracy, rather than as the rule 
of the masses that more informed observers are voicing 
concerns about.  The ability of several thousand protesters 
-- many of them too young to vote -- to bring Korea's 
government to a standstill threatens Korean credibility in 
negotiating other international agreements.  More serious 
still are the long term implications for the governability of 
Korea.  Koreans -- both on the right and the left -- are 
beginning to express serious concern that the beef hysteria 
is dangerously empowering the "mob."  Unless the ROKG manages 
to win some control back, many of our interlocutors see a 
grim picture of protests becoming the norm in deciding the 
nation's policy. 
 
---------------- 
Alliance on Hold? 
---------------- 
 
¶15.  (C) The beef issue will have profound influence on our 
bilateral relationship in the coming months.  First, Lee 
Myung-bak must rebuild domestic trust in his administration 
 
SEOUL 00001204  005 OF 005 
 
 
before he or his staff can even think about making any 
progress on ongoing bilateral issues.  To rush into any 
controversial Alliance agreements, our ROKG interlocutors 
believe, is to open the door on the nascent anti-Americanism 
that the protests have thus far assiduously avoided.  Already 
the ROKG has taken care to push all ongoing Alliance issues 
to the back burner.  In the last two weeks, the ROK side has 
postponed some of our bilateral talks -- the 
regularly-scheduled Strategic Consultations for Allied 
Partnership (SCAP), the next round of SMA negotiations, and 
talks on the environmental issues relating to the return of 
nine USFK camps.  SMA and camp returns have long been two of 
the most sensitive Alliance issues for the Koreans, as they 
require committing ROK budgetary expenditures and have 
generated significant criticism for "not standing up to the 
U.S." on previous occasions.  Other issues that the Korean 
public sees as being on the U.S. "wish list" -- such as 
continued or expanded ROK participation in Iraq and 
Afghanistan as well as involvement in the Proliferation 
Security Initiative (PSI) -- will also prove more difficult 
to make progress on in the short to medium term. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶16.  (C) This is a nightmare for Lee Myung-bak.  Simply put, 
he does not know what to do right now.  He knows that to give 
in to the protests is to cripple his administration for the 
remaining 56 months.  Yet, ignoring their demands will only 
prolong the agony and make him look even weaker.  The course 
he has chosen is a little bit of both:  bow to the crowd by 
apologizing and revising some elements of the beef deal, but 
not go all the way to a renegotiation of the agreement that 
would likely kill chances for ratification of the FTA in the 
U.S.  In addition, he will reshuffle the cabinet and his 
senior staff.  Thereafter, Lee must begin the long process of 
regaining his own credibility.  Key to this scenario is 
getting significant help from the National Assembly, which is 
possible only if President Lee accepts the reality that he 
must share power with his fellow conservatives, principally 
Park Geun-hye. 
 
¶17.  (C) At this time President Lee needs our help to come 
out of the immediate crisis.  Our first task must be to stop 
his political free-fall by agreeing on a beef package that he 
can sell to his mainstream domestic critics -- satisfying the 
extremists is not possible, unless Lee resigns.  At the same 
time, we should be prepared to defer our sensitive bilateral 
issues, such as SMA and camp returns, until the situation has 
stabilized.  Beyond the immediate terms, we must also support 
and vindicate Lee's original -- and courageous -- decision on 
beef by making a concerted effort to push for KORUS FTA 
ratification in the Congress.  Our failure to ratify the 
KORUS FTA will most definitely further weaken the Lee 
presidency.  In the longer term, the damage Lee has suffered 
from the beef hysteria is such that we might need to reassess 
our expectations for the "21st Century Strategic Alliance" 
launched at Camp David because, if the Lee Administration 
continues on its current course, we will be dealing with a 
crippled ally for a long time to come. 
VERSHBOW
</file>

