^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1739  |  2009-11-02 08:13  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 2일 ======
미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001739

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 2일
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2015/04/03 20:45//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
'유령 아파트'가 쏟아진다

중앙일보
본지, 30대 그룹 경영계획 조사: 경쟁력·신성장·사업다각화 … 재계‘공격경영’준비 중

동아일보
'과학비즈니스벨트+@'/ 세종시 대안으로 떠오르나

한국일보, 세계일보, 모든 텔레비전
'세종시' 여권 내부갈등 심화

한겨레 신문
국민 59% "언론법 재개정해야"

서울신문
'의식주 소비' 살아난다
===== 국내 동향 =====

한국 정부 소식통에 의하면 한국과 미국은 북한 급변사태에 대비해 한미 합동 작전 계획을 완료하였다. "작전계획(작계) 5029"에 따라 대부분의 작전은 한국 군이 주도할 예정이지만, 미군은 핵무기/시설 헤체 임무를 맡을 예정이다. (모든 신문)

미국은 한국 정부의 민간인으로 구성된 아프간 지방재건팀 강화 계획과 그들을 아직 인원이 정해지지는 않았지만, 지방재건팀을 보호하기 위한 병력 파병을 환영하였다. 로버트 깁스 백악관 대변인의 [[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/politics/defense/385238.html|10월 30일 발언]]이 인용되었다: “이런 지원이 아프간의 안정과 재건을 위한 국제사회의 노력에 크게 기여할 것”(한겨레)
===== 국제 뉴스 =====

북한 외무성 리 근 미국국장이 10월 30일 뉴욕에서 열린 세미나에 참석한 이후 기자에게 미국 쪽 관리들과 [[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/politics/defense/385240.html|"유익한 대화를 나눴다"]]고 기자들에게 말했다. (동아, 한겨레)

10월 30일 유럽연합과 일본이 5년 연속으로 북한의 인권 침해 실체를 점검하기 위한 대북인권결의안을 유엔에 제출하였다. 한국인 작년에 이어 올해도 동 결의안을 공동제안국으로 참여했다. (조선, 동아, 한국, 세계)
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 아프간 원조 ====

한국 정부가 민간인으로 구성된 아프간 지방재건팀을 강화하며 아직 인원은 미정이지만 보호 병력을 파견할 예정이라는 10월 30일 한국 정부 발표가 토요일 언론에 크게 보도되었다. 언론 보도에 의하면 파병 규모와 장소를 비롯한 세부 사항은 정부 실사단이 현지 조사를 마친 이후에 결정된 예정이다.

대다수 언론 매체는 제1여당 민주당을 포함한 야당이 반대할 가능성 때문에 아프가니스탄 파병을 위한 국회 승인을 받기가 어려울 것이라고 예상하였다.

로버트 깁스 백악관 대변인의 10월 30일 발언이 인용되었다: “이런 지원이 아프간의 안정과 재건을 위한 국제사회의 노력에 크게 기여할 것”

보수 조선일보는 사설에 이렇게 썼다: "이번 군·경찰 파견은 전투병 파병(派兵)이 아니다."다른 나라들도 PRT를 보내 아프간의 주(州)를 나눠 맡아 다양한 경제 재건 지원 활동을 벌이면서, 자체 방위 목적으로 별도의 군·경찰 병력을 함께 파견하는 경우가 많다. 현재 아프간에는 미군 6만8000여명을 비롯해 40여개국에서 파견한 군대가 10만여명에 이르지만, 탈레반 등 무장세력과의 전투가 갈수록 치열해지면서 각국의 PRT 활동 안전에까지 신경 쓸 여력이 없는 상태다. 우리의 재건 지원 인력을 보호하는 군 병력의 파견은 필수적이다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 사설에서 "한국 정부의 설명을 액면 그대로 받아들이기가 쉽지 않다. 미국 측의 비공식적이거나 우회적인 요청이 있었을 것으로 짐작된다. 한국 정부는 국익을 고려해 파병을 결정했다고 말하지만, 파병은 논란이 심한 문제라 국민에게 직접 설명하기가 어려울 것이다. 그러나 한국 정부의 기조는 이해할만 한다. 우리는 이명박 정부의 아프간 파병 결정을 지지한다. …그런 노력을 바탕으로 국민을 설득함으로써 국민 다수가 동의하는 가운데 파병할 수 있어야 한다.

좌파 경향의 한겨레 신문은 사설에서 이렇게 주장했다: "민간 요원 보호 목적이든 전투 목적이든 ‘지금 상황에서는’ 어떤 일이 있어도 아프간에 군인을 보내선 안 된다."…정부가 이 시점에서 서둘러 파병 방침을 결정한 것은 버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 방한을 앞두고 미국의 입맛을 맞춰주자는 것으로밖에 해석할 수 없다. 미국조차 증파를 결정하지 못하는 상황에서 재파병까지 하면서 젊은 생명을 사지로 내모는 정부는 과연 누구를 위한 정부인지 묻고 싶다. 정부는 파병 방침을 철회해야 마땅하다.
==== 북한 ====

보수 동아일보와 좌파 경향의 한겨레 신문은 오늘 북한 외무성 리 근 미국국장이 10월 30일 뉴욕에서 열린 세미나에 참석한 이후 기자에게 미국 쪽 관리들과 "유익한 대화를 나눴다"고 기자들에게 말했다고 보도했다.
===== 사설 =====
**
[[http://article.joins.com/news/article/article.asp?total_id=3851865&ctg=|[사설] 아프간 파병 어렵게 결정 … 희생 최소화 방안 찾아야(중앙일보 2009년 10월 31일자 34면)]]**

정부가 30일 아프가니스탄에 민간 지방재건지원팀(PRT)과 이들을 보호할 병력을 파견할 예정이라고 밝혔다. 파견 지역과 인원은 아직 확정되지 않았다. 정부는 PRT 요원을 현재 25명에서 130명가량으로 늘리고 이들을 보호하기 위해 300명 정도의 군 병력을 파병하는 방안을 검토 중인 것으로 알려져 있다. 아프간은 2007년 샘물교회 신도 20여 명이 탈레반 세력에 피랍돼 2명이 살해된 끝에 40여 일 만에 풀려난 사건이 벌어졌던 현장이다. <wrap hi>또 건설·의료 지원부대로 파병됐던 다산·동의부대 병사 2명도 희생됐다.</wrap> 이처럼 위험성이 큰 지역에 재차 파병한다는 점에서 향후 국회 동의 과정을 거치기까지 어느 때보다 큰 논란이 예상된다. 그만큼 정부의 고충도 매우 컸을 것으로 짐작된다.

<wrap hi>정부는 아프간 파병은 미국의 아프간 군사 캠페인을 지지함으로써 한미 동맹을 공고히 하는 차원이다. 그러나 정부는 아프간 파병 결정에 대해 정부는 미국 정부가 파병 관련 세부적인 요구가 없었다며 우리의 국력에 맞게 국제사회에서 책임을 다하는 차원에서 독자적으로 내린 결정이라고 설명했다. 한국 정부의 설명을 액면 그대로 받아들이기가 쉽지 않다. 미국 측의 비공식적이거나 우회적인 요청이 있었을 것으로 짐작된다. 한국 정부는 국익을 고려해 파병을 결정했다고 말하지만, 파병은 논란이 심한 문제라 국민에게 직접 설명하기가 어려울 것이다. 그러나 한국 정부의 기조는 이해할만 한다. 우리는 이명박 정부의 아프간 파병 결정을 지지한다. 우리는 한국이 국력에 맞게 국제 사회에 기여해야 한다는 정부의 설명에 대해 견해를 같이한다.</wrap> 동맹국인 미국의 입장을 배려함으로써 양국 관계를 더욱 공고히 다질 수 있다는 측면에서도 긍정적으로 평가할 수 있을 것이다.<WRAP center round help 90%>//**아프간 파병 희생자는 1명이 아니라 2명!, 영문/국문 사설 논조를 바꿔서 기사 작성하는 중앙일보**// 
일단 윤장호 하사가 아프간에서 자살 폭탄 테러로 희생되었다는 사실을 보도를 통해 아는 사람도 있을 것이다. 윤 하사는 샘물 교회 납치 이전에 희생되었다. 그런데 본 중앙일보가 미 대사관에 넘겨준 영어 버전 사설에는 희생자가 2명이라고 적시되어 있다. 그럼 윤하사 말고 다른 희생자 1명은 누구인가? 참으로 해괴한 일이다. 중앙일보 웹사이트에 게재된 동 기사(영어버전과 한글 버전 혼합기사---따라서 일부는 번역했음)의[[http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/Article.aspx?aid=2911926|영어 버전]]과 [[http://article.joins.com/news/article/article.asp?total_id=3851865&ctg=|한국어 버전]]은 희생자 숫자 이외에 기사의 논조도 사뭇 다르다. 위에 하이라이트 부분은 역자가 영어 버전을 번역한 내용이며 한국어 버전과 논조가 다른 부분에 해당하는 한글 기사 내용은 다음과 같다: <정부는 아프간 파병 결정에 대해 우리의 국력에 맞게 국제사회에서 책임을 다하는 차원에서 독자적으로 내린 결정이라고 설명했다. 미국 측의 비공식적이거나 우회적인 요청이 있었을 것으로 짐작되지만 정부 설명대로 한·미 간 사전 협의나 요구 없이 단독으로 취한 조치가 맞다면 그 자체로도 의미가 있다 하겠다. 국력에 걸맞은 책임 차원이든 한·미동맹의 역학관계이든 우리의 국제정치적 환경을 고려해 파병이 피하기 어려운 상황이라면 우리 스스로 결단을 내리는 것이 차라리 나을 수 있다고 본다. 의연한 모양새도 그렇고 동맹국인 미국의 입장을 배려함으로써 양국 관계를 더욱 공고히 다질 수 있다는 측면에서도 긍정적으로 평가할 수 있을 것이다.>
</WRAP>

김태영 국방부 장관은 엊그제 국회에서 "파병할 경우 불가피한 교전과 희생이 뒤따를 것"이라고 밝혔다. 정부가 파병에 따른 위험성을 솔직하게 밝힌 것은 올바른 태도다. 그 연장선상에서 위험한데도 파병해야 하는 이유에 대해 정부는 보다 설득력 있는 설명을 내놔야 할 것이다. 아울러 파견 지역 선정과 재건 지원업무 협의 과정에서 희생을 최소화하면서도 효과적으로 지원하는 방안을 찾는 데 최선의 노력을 다해야 한다. 희생은 피할 수 없지만, 아프가니스탄 파병은 전투 임무를 수행하기 위한 것이 아니라 재건 지원을 위한 것이다. 그런 노력을 바탕으로 국민을 설득함으로써 국민 다수가 동의하는 가운데 파병할 수 있어야 한다. 그런 노력을 바탕으로 국민을 설득함으로써 국민 다수가 동의하는 가운데 파병할 수 있어야 한다.

(이 기사는 중앙일보가 제공한 번역이다. 우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 [[http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/Article.aspx?aid=2911926|영어 버전(아프간 희생자 2명이라고 적시)]]과 [[http://article.joins.com/news/article/article.asp?total_id=3851865&ctg=|한국어 버전(아프간 희생자 1명이라고 적시)]]을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 일부 영어 문장을 추가하였다.)

**[[http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/Article.aspx?aid=2911926|[사설] 국민 생명보다 미국 심기를 중시하는 정부(한겨레 신문 2009년 10월 31일자 23면)]]**

정부가 어제 지방재건팀 요원을 대폭 늘리고, 이들을 보호하기 위한 군인을 파견하겠다는 내용의 아프간 지원 방침을 발표했다. 민간 요원을 보호하기 위한 군인의 파견이 불가피하다는 이유를 대고 있지만, 지원 계획의 핵심은 누가 봐도 재파병에 있다. 민간 요원보다 2배 이상 많은 병력을 파견하려고 하면서, 병력보다 지방재건팀 파견을 앞세우는 것이야말로 파병에 대한 비난을 피하려는 궤변에 불과하다. 정부 스스로 정당성도 명분도 없는 파병이라는 것을 인정하는 셈이다.

민간 요원 보호 목적이든 전투 목적이든 ‘지금 상황에서는’ 어떤 일이 있어도 아프간에 군인을 보내선 안 된다. 전 지역이 전투장화한 아프간에서 우리만 전투에 가담하지 않는다고 해서 전투가 이뤄지지 않는 것이 아니다. 아프간 반군의 입장에서 보면, 아프간에 파견된 외국 군인은 모두 제거해야 할 적일 뿐이다. 10월 한 달에만 50명 이상의 미군이 숨진 점을 고려하면, 한국군의 희생자가 나올 가능성이 매우 크다. 김태영 국방부 장관도 그제 국회 답변에서 “불가피한 교전이 있을 수 있고 피해가 있을 수 있다”고 말하지 않았는가.

대의명분이 뚜렷하고 국민적인 공감대가 이뤄진다면, 파병을 할 수도 희생을 감수할 수도 있다. 하지만 정부는 그럴 만한 명분을 제시하지 못하고 있다. 유명환 외교통상부 장관은 글로벌 코리아로 가기 위해 테러와의 전쟁에 공헌할 의무가 있고, 주한미군의 안정적인 주둔 여건을 마련하기 위해 아프간 지원이 필요하다는 논리를 제시했다. 하지만 전혀 설득력이 없다. 아프간 전쟁은 테러와의 전쟁 국면을 넘어 전면전화한 지 오래고, 주한미군 주둔 여건 운운은 국민의 안보 불안 심리를 자극해 파병을 정당화하려는 얕은꾀로밖에 보이지 않는다. 주한미군 일부가 아프간으로 이동한다면 그것은 한-미 간의 주한미군 전략유연성 합의에 따른 것이지 한국의 아프간 파병 여부와 관련이 없다는 것은 유 장관 자신이 누구보다 잘 알 것이다.

정부가 이 시점에서 서둘러 파병 방침을 결정한 것은 버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 방한을 앞두고 미국의 입맛을 맞춰주자는 것으로밖에 해석할 수 없다. 미국조차 증파를 결정하지 못하는 상황에서 재파병까지 하면서 젊은 생명을 사지로 내모는 정부는 과연 누구를 위한 정부인지 묻고 싶다. 정부는 파병 방침을 철회해야 마땅하다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/opinion/editorial/385294.html|[사설] ‘작계5029’가 아니라 남북대화를 고민할 때(한겨레 신문 2009년 11월 2일자 27면)]]**

북한의 급변 사태에 대비한 한-미 합동군사계획 ‘작계5029’ 문제가 또다시 논란이 되고 있다. <연합뉴스>가 어제 정부 고위 소식통의 입을 빌려, 북한의 급변 사태 유형을 핵 등 대량살상무기의 유출, 북한의 정권 교체, 쿠데타 등에 의한 내전 상황, 북한 내 한국인 인질 사태, 대규모 주민 탈북 사태, 대규모 자연재해 등 5~6개의 유형으로 정리하고, 이에 따른 작전계획(작계5029)을 완성했다고 보도했다. 합동참모본부는 즉각 ‘사실과 다르다’고 부인했으나, 청와대와 국방부 관계자들은 ‘노코멘트’라거나 “지난해부터 작계5029와 관련해 한-미 간 이런저런 협의가 있었다”고 말했다. 뭔가 물밑에서 작업이 벌어지고 있다는 것을 인정한 셈이다. 한-미가 전시작전권 전환 뒤에도 북한의 대량살상무기 제거와 해병대의 강습상륙작전은 미군이 주도하기로 합의했다는 월터 샤프 주한미군사령관의 지난 30일의 발언과도 흐름이 맞다.

한-미가 북한의 내부 혼란 등의 상황에 대비해 긴밀하게 협력하면서 치밀한 계획을 세우는 것은 필요한 일이다. 하지만 군사작전을 앞세운 대비는 위험하기 그지없는 발상이다. 북한에 갑작스런 혼란이 생기더라도 시간이 지남에 따라 스스로 안정될 수도 있고, 국제 협력이나 남북대화 등 비군사적 방법으로 사태를 진정시킬 수 있는 길이 얼마든지 있다. 북한에 급변 사태가 생길 경우 바로 군사작전에 들어가는 것을 전제로 한 작계5029는 이런 평화적 해결의 길을 막고 전쟁을 불러올 가능성이 매우 크다. 또 핵 등 대량살상무기 제거에 초점을 둔 미국과 전쟁 방지에 중점을 둔 한국과의 이해 불일치, 한-미 간 작전지휘권을 둘러싼 주권 논란, 중국의 개입으로 국제전화할 가능성 등 고려해야 할 예민한 문제가 한두 가지가 아니다. 노무현 정부 때 논의를 작전계획이 아니라 개념계획에 한정한 것도 이런 이유 때문이었다.

지금 한반도 정세는 원자바오 중국 총리의 방북을 계기로 제재에서 대화 쪽으로 큰 흐름이 잡혀 있다. 정부가 급변 사태의 가장 주요한 요소로 생각했던 김정일 북한 국방위원장의 건강 문제도 여러 경로를 통해 큰 이상이 없는 것으로 확인됐다. 정부는 자칫 전쟁의 참화로 이어질 수 있는 작계5029의 부활에 집착할 것이 아니라, 국제 흐름에 뒤지지 않도록 남북대화 복원에 온 힘을 기울여야 할 때이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://news.donga.com/Column/3/04/20091102/23826622/2|[사설]유명무실한 戰作權전환, 굳이 강행할 일인가(동아일보 2009년 11월 2일자 35면)]]**

2012년 한미연합사 해체와 전시작전통제권(전작권) 전환 이후에도 북한 핵 및 미사일 제거작전과 상륙작전은 미군이 주도한다고 월터 샤프 주한미군사령관이 지난주 밝혔다. 그는 한미안보연구회와 동아일보 부설 화정평화재단이 주최한 국제회의에서 “한국은 그런 특수작전 능력과 전력(戰力)을 갖추지 않은 점을 고려해 한미 양국이 최근 그렇게 합의했다”고 전했다. 한국군의 독자적인 첨단전력 확보에 차질이 빚어지고 있는 상황에서 샤프 사령관의 발언은 국민의 안보 불안감을 상당히 누그러뜨렸다.

북의 핵무기 저장소와 미사일 발사기지, 주요 지휘소 등 유사시 파괴 목표는 약 1000곳에 이른다. 이들 지점을 빠른 시간 안에 정확히 타격하려면 우리의 전력만으로는 턱없이 부족하다. 미국 영토와 주일미군 기지를 포함한 세계 각지에서 첨단 전폭기, 항공모함, 크루즈 미사일 등을 동원해야 한다. 북의 미사일 공격을 막아낼 이지스함과 요격미사일도 필요하다. 미군 지휘관이 아니면 이런 첨단무기를 한반도에서 운용하기가 사실상 불가능하다. 한미 양국이 한국군의 현실적 한계를 인정하고 군사적 대안을 마련했다는 점에서 샤프 사령관의 발언은 다소나마 위안을 준다.

샤프 사령관은 “전작권이 전환되면 한국 합참의장의 통제에 따라 한미 육해군 연합전력은 한국군 지휘관이, 공군 연합전력은 미 7공군사령관이 주도할 것”이라고 말했다. 일종의 역할 분담이다. 그러나 이는 주한미군사령관이 겸하고 있는 연합사령관 체제하의 일원적(一元的) 지휘체계가 이원화(二元化) 다층화(多層化)의 복잡한 구조로 바뀌게 됨을 뜻한다. 핵심적인 대량살상무기(WMD) 제거 및 상륙작전을 미군이 주도한다고 해도 연합작전이 전반적으로 원활하게 이루어지지 못할 수도 있다.

미국은 2012년 이후 연합사를 대체할 새로운 작전협조 체제를 갖추고 핵 억지력과 보완전력을 계속 지원할 것이라고 기회가 있을 때마다 거듭 천명했다. 하지만 샤프 사령관의 발언은 2012년 이후 한국군의 전작권 단독행사 영역이 제한적일 수밖에 없다는 점을 새삼 확인시켜 준다. 그렇다면 거의 유명무실(有名無實)한 전작권 조기 전환을 굳이 강행할 필요가 있는지 의문이 아닐 수 없다. 연합방위 능력을 스스로 약화시키는 결과만 초래할 우려가 크다.

우리의 안보 상황과 첨단 군사력 수준을 직시하고 전작권 전환 시기에 대해 한미 양국이 원점에서 다시 논의할 필요가 있다. 

**[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/30/2009103001543.html|[사설] 아프간 지원 확대는 전투병 파병(派兵)이 아니다(조선일보 2009년 10월 31일, 31면)]]**

정부는 30일 아프가니스탄 지방 재건팀(PRT) 규모를 현재 24명에서 최대 150명까지 늘리고, 이들을 보호하기 위한 경찰 및 군 경비 병력을 함께 파견한다고 발표했다. 정부는 군·경찰 파견 규모는 밝히지 않았지만 200~300명 선이 될 것이라고 한다. 외교통상부 대변인은 "새로 파견하는 PRT는 아프간 내의 1개 주(州)에서 지방정부의 행정 역량 강화, 경제 재건, 사회 시설 건설, 인도적 지원 등의 활동을 담당할 것"이라며 "우리 군과 경찰은 자체 방위와 자위권 행사에 전념할 것이며, 별도의 전투 행위에는 참여하지 않을 것"이라고 밝혔다.

"우리 군과 경찰은 자체 방위와 자위권 행사에 전념할 것이며, 별도의 전투 행위에는 참여하지 않을 것"이라고 밝혔다. 우리의 PRT 인력을 보호하기 위한 것이지만 한국군이 2년여 만인 내년 초쯤 아프간에 다시 발을 딛게 될 가능성이 높아졌다.

2007년 의료·공병부대가 철수한 것은 그해 7월 한국인 선교단원 20여명이 무장 반군 세력에 납치돼 일부가 살해된 사건 때문이었다. 국민들이 아프가니스탄에 자체 방위 병력이라 해도 군이 다시 간다면 걱정할 가능성이 있다.

이번 군·경찰 파견은 전투병 파병(派兵)이 아니다. 다른 나라들도 PRT를 보내 아프간의 주(州)를 나눠 맡아 다양한 경제 재건 지원 활동을 벌이면서, 자체 방위 목적으로 별도의 군·경찰 병력을 함께 파견하는 경우가 많다. 현재 아프간에는 미군 6만8000여명을 비롯해 40여개국에서 파견한 군대가 10만여명에 이르지만, 탈레반 등 무장세력과의 전투가 갈수록 치열해지면서 각국의 PRT 활동 안전에까지 신경 쓸 여력이 없는 상태다. 우리의 재건 지원 인력을 보호하는 군 병력의 파견은 필수적이다.

한국은 차기 세계 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의 의장국이고 세계 10위권의 경제력을 갖춘 나라다. 그러나 6·25전쟁과 그 후까지 국제 사회의 지원이 없었다면 존재 자체가 어떻게 됐을지 알 수 없는 나라였다. 국제 사회의 도움으로 탄생하고 성장해온 우리가 이제 남을 도울 능력을 갖고서도 이를 소홀히 한다면 의무를 다하지 않는 것이다. 아프간 사태와 같은 세계 최대의 현안을 외면하고서 국제 사회의 진정한 인정을 받고 리더십을 세워나간다는 것도 불가능한 일이다.

정부는 이번 조치가 아프간 국민이 나라를 재건하는 것을 돕기 위한 차원이지, 군사적 관여가 아니라는 사실을 분명히 해야 한다. 무엇보다 이슬람권을 자극하는 일이 없도록 신중을 기해야 한다. 국회에서도 아프간 파견 인력의 안전과 국익(國益)을 감안한 논의가 필요하다.
===== 특집 =====

**[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/society/society_general/385316.html|국민 59% “언론법 재개정해야”(한겨레 신문 2009년 11월 2일 4면)]]**
박창식 기자

리서치플러스의 여론조사 결과 이명박 정부의 사업 중에서 4대강 사업이 가장 인기가 없는 것으로 나타났다. 또한, 표현의 자유 침해에 대한 우려가 젊은 층에 폭넓게 확산돼있음이 드러난다.

10·28 국회의원 재보궐 선거에서 한나라당은 수도·충청권 등 전략 지역에서 완패했다. 특히 이명박 대통령의 국정지지율이 비교적 높은 가운데 그런 결과가 나와, 실제 민심의 저류에 대한 궁금증이 높아진 상태다.

<한겨레>가 <리서치플러스>에 맡겨 토요일에 시행한 여론조사는 최근 논란이 되는 이명박 정부의 정책들을 6가지로 추려 제시하면서 가장 문제가 있다고 생각하는 일을 꼽아달라고 했다. 그 결과 ‘4대강 추진’이 41.4%로 압도적 1순위로 꼽혔다. 이번 조사의 응답자들은 지역별, 연령별, 지지정당을 가릴 것 없이 모두 문제 정책 1순위로 4대강 추진을 꼽았다.

연령별로 볼 때는 30대에서 48.1%, 40대에서 53.7%가 4대강 추진을 문제 1순위로 꼽았다. 50대는 37.3%, 60살 이상은 29.8%로 문제 1순위로 꼽는 비율이 상대적으로 낮았다. 여론주도층인 30~40대에서 ‘4대강 거부감’이 좀더 강렬하다는 점이 눈에 띈다. 고학력, 고소득층으로 갈수록 4대강 추진에 부정적이라는 점도 확인됐다.

문제정책 2순위와 3순위로는 ‘미디어법 처리’(11.2%), ‘김제동·손석희씨 퇴출 등 언론정책’(8.9%)이 꼽혔다. 미디어법 처리와 관련해선 20대의 19.8%, 30대의 16.7%가 문제 1순위로 꼽은 점이 주목된다. 김제동·손석희씨 퇴출과 관련해선 20대의 15.8%가 문제 1순위로 꼽았다. 표현의 자유 침해에 대한 우려가 20~30대에 폭넓게 확산돼있음이 드러난다. 그 다음으로는 ‘세종시 축소 추진’(8.5%), ‘용산참사 처리’(7.8%), ‘노조 전임자 급여 지급금지 등 노동정책’(5.6%) 등의 순위가 나타났다.

표현의 자유에 관한 젊은 층의 강한 우려는, 헌재 결정에 관한 문항에서도 드러났다. 헌재의 미디어법 관련 결정에 대해 ‘올바르지 않다’는 의견은 전체적으로 60.4%였다. 그런데 같은 문항에 20대는 74.7%, 30대 71.8%, 40대 66.8%가 ‘올바르지 않다’고 응답했다. 학력별로는 대학재학 71.3%, 대졸 이상 67.0%가 헌재 결정이 올바르지 않다고 응답했다. 소득별로는 월 400만원 이상인 사람의 71.3%가 올바르지 않다고 응답했다. 헌재의 미디어법 결정에 대한 의견도 고학력·고소득으로 갈수록 부정적이었다.

아프가니스탄 파병과 관련한 전체 응답은 반대 49.8%, 찬성 42.4%로 반대의견이 약간 우세한 정도였다. 그런데 이 대목에선 남성이 찬성 54.4%, 반대 41.3%인 반면에 여성은 찬성 30.8%에 반대 58.0%로 엇갈렸다. 평화 쟁점에 남성보다 여성이 좀더 긍정적이라는 젠더 특성이 나타난 셈이다.

이번 조사는 전국 19살 이상 남녀 1000명을 상대로 전화면접 방식으로 이뤄졌다. 오차한계는 95% 신뢰수준에서 ±3.1%포인트다.
스티븐스
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/18/09seoul1739|포와로 탐정의 번역]] (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1739.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001739 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 2, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Glut of Unsold Apartments Weighs on Regional Economies 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Survey: ROK's Top 30 Conglomerates 
See the Economy Recovering 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Building Science and Business Belt in Chungcheong Province Emerges 
as Possible Alternative to Sejong City Plan 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, All TVs 
Feud Intensifies in Ruling Camp over Sejong City Plan 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Survey: 59 Percent of Respondents Favor 
Revising Controversial Media Reform Bills 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
Spending on Basics Back to Pre-Crisis Levels 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
---------------------- 
 
According to an ROKG source, the ROK and the U.S. have completed a 
joint operation plan in case of emergencies in North Korea. Under 
the so-called "Operational Plan (OPLAN) 5029,"most operations will 
be led by the ROK army, but the U.S. military will be responsible 
for removing nuclear facilities and weapons. (All) 
 
The U.S. welcomed the ROKG's plan to reinforce its civilian 
reconstruction team in Afghanistan and send an unspecified number of 
troops to protect them. White House Spokesman Robert Gibbs was 
quoted as saying in an Oct. 30 statement: "This is an important 
contribution to the international effort in Afghanistan and to 
fostering reconstruction and stability in the region." (Hankyoreh) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Ri Gun, Director General of American Affairs at North Korea's 
Foreign Ministry, told reporters on Oct. 30 after attending a 
seminar in New York that he had useful talks with U.S. officials. 
(Dong-a, Hankyoreh) 
 
On Oct. 30, the EU and Japan submitted to the UN a draft resolution 
on human rights abuses in North Korea for review for the fifth 
consecutive year. The ROK co-sponsored the resolution for the second 
year running. (Chosun, Dong-a, Hankook, Segye) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
--------------- 
 
-Aid for Afghanistan 
-------------------- 
The ROKG's Oct. 30 announcement - that it will reinforce its 
civilian reconstruction team in Afghanistan and send an unspecified 
number of troops to protect them - received wide press coverage on 
Saturday.  According to media reports, the specifics of the 
dispatch, including its size and location, will be determined after 
a government fact-finding team completes its on-site investigation. 
 
Most media predicted difficulties in the ROKG receiving 
parliamentary approval for the dispatch because of possible 
objections from opposition parties, including the main opposition 
Democratic Party. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001739  002 OF 007 
 
 
White House Spokesman Robert Gibbs was quoted as saying in an Oct. 
30 statement: "This is an important contribution to the 
international effort in Afghanistan and to fostering reconstruction 
and stability in the region." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "The troops and police 
officers to be deployed this time are not combat forces.  Other 
countries have also sent military and police forces for protection 
when they sent their PRT to help with the rebuilding work in 
Afghanistan.  Currently, there are 68,000 U.S. troops and 100,000 
military forces from 40 countries in Afghanistan.  With battles with 
militants, such as the Taliban, becoming increasingly fierce, 
however, they are not in a position to ensure the safety of the PRTs 
from each country.  It is essential that the ROK deploy troops to 
protect its PRT." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "It is not easy to 
accept the ROKG's explanation as it is.  There may be unofficial and 
indirect requests from the U.S.  The ROKG said that it decided to 
deploy troops, considering its own national interests, but it will 
be difficult for the government to provide a direct explanation to 
the people (for the troop deployment) because the issue is likely to 
be contentious.  Still, the ROKG's stance is understandable.  We 
support the Lee Administration's decision to deploy troops to 
Afghanistan. ...  The ROKG must find the best way to minimize the 
sacrifice while maximizing efficiency." 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun argued in an editorial: "Whether the 
goal is to protect civilian workers or to engage in combat, sending 
troops to Afghanistan is madness, given the country's current state. 
 ... For the Lee Administration to rush into a decision on its 
military deployment at this point in time cannot be read as anything 
but an attempt to curry favor with the U.S. prior to U.S. President 
Barack Obama's upcoming visit to the ROK.  Seeing the government 
endangering young lives by redeploying forces even as the U.S. 
itself remains undecided on additional deployments, one cannot help 
asking who the Lee Administration really represents.  The Lee 
Administration should cancel plans for redeployment." 
 
¶N. Korea 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo and left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun today 
quoted Ri Gun, Director General of American Affairs at North Korea's 
Foreign Ministry, as telling reporters on Oct. 30 after attending a 
seminar in New York that he had useful talks with U.S. officials. 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
CONSENSUS BEFORE DISPATCH 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 31, 2009, Page 34) 
 
The Lee Myung-bak Administration announced yesterday that it has 
formulated a plan to send a group of civilians to Afghanistan to 
support the provincial reconstruction team and troops.  Where in 
Afghanistan and how many will be sent has not yet been finalized. 
The government is considering sending around 130 civilians and a 
300-strong contingent of troops.  Afghanistan is where 23 
missionaries from Korea's Saemmul Church were kidnapped in 2007 by 
the Taliban.  Two were murdered.  The captives - aside from the two 
who were murdered - were released after 40 days.  The government has 
since withdrawn its Dasan and Dongui medical support military units 
from Afghanistan. Two soldiers from the units died in action.  The 
government has decided to send troops again to this high-risk 
region, and there's bound to be some controversy and debate until 
the deployment receives approval of the National Assembly. 
 
The reason for the deployment lies in the need to solidify the 
Korea-U.S. alliance by supporting the United States' military 
campaign in the war-torn nation.  The government, however, said 
Washington did not make any specific demand for troops and Seoul 
made its own decision to send personnel based on its desire to raise 
the country's position in the international community.  It is not 
easy to accept the ROKG's explanation as it is.  There may be 
 
SEOUL 00001739  003 OF 007 
 
 
unofficial and indirect requests from the U.S.  The ROKG said that 
it decided to deploy troops, considering its own national interests, 
but it will be difficult for the government to provide a direct 
explanation to the people (for the troop deployment) because the 
issue is likely to be contentious.  Still, the ROKG's stance is 
understandable.  We support the Lee Administration's decision to 
deploy troops to Afghanistan.  We agree with the government's 
explanation that Korea must make a contribution to the international 
community that matches its national power.  Above all, we believe 
the deployment is necessary, taking into account the gains that 
Korea will see from the reinforced alliance with the United States. 
 
Minister of National Defense Kim Tae-young said at the National 
Assembly on October 29, "There could be inevitable hostilities and 
casualties."  It was right for the ROKG not to hide any of the 
dangers of the troop dispatch.  The ROKG should give more convincing 
reasons why Seoul should send troops to Afghanistan despite its 
associated dangers.  Where the troops will be sent should be 
carefully selected based on security. Casualties may be inevitable; 
however the deployment is not being carried out to fight in combat 
but to provide support for reconstruction.  Therefore, the ROKG must 
find the best way to minimize the sacrifice while maximizing 
efficiency.  Based on such efforts, the government must persuade the 
people and send the troops after winning a consensus from the 
nation. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper.  We compared the 
English version on the website with the Korean version and added 
some sentences in English to make them identical.) 
 
 
LEE GOVERNMENT MUST CANCEL TROOP REDEPLOYMENT TO AFGHANISTAN 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, October 31, 2009, Page 23) 
 
Yesterday the Lee Administration and ruling Grand National Party 
(GNP) announced their plan for assistance in Afghanistan, which 
involves a large-scale increase in Provincial Reconstruction Team 
(PRT) personnel and the deployment of soldiers to protect them.  The 
reason they are giving is that the deployment of soldiers is 
inevitable to protect civilian workers, but anyone can see that 
redeployment of military forces is at the heart of the assistance 
plan.  An emphasis on sending PRT personnel is merely a smokescreen 
to avoid criticism of the deployment of more than twice as many 
military troops than civilian workers.  In essence, the Lee 
government is acknowledging that this is a deployment without 
legitimacy or justification. 
 
Whether the goal is to protect civilian workers or to engage in 
combat, sending troops to Afghanistan is madness, given the 
country's current state, and it must be stopped.  Since the whole 
region has now been transformed into a battlefield, it cannot be 
said that the South Korean troops being sent to provide protection 
for PRT workers will not experience combat.  From the standpoint of 
Afghanistan's rebel army, all foreign soldiers deployed to 
Afghanistan are enemies who should be killed.  Given that more than 
50 U.S. troops died in October alone, there is a very strong chance 
we will see casualties among the South Korean forces.  Even Defense 
Minister Kim Tae-young said in his response to the National Assembly 
the day before yesterday, "There could be inevitable hostilities and 
casualties." 
 
Deployments and losses are acceptable as long as the public's 
sympathy for the justification has been established.  However, the 
Lee government has been unable to produce any worthy justification 
thus far.  Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan says that South Korea has 
an obligation to contribute to the war on terror in order to become 
a "global Korea," and, in support of this, he says that assistance 
in Afghanistan is necessary in order to establish conditions for the 
continued stable stationing of U.S. Forces in South Korea, but this 
is utterly unconvincing.  The war in Afghanistan has long since gone 
beyond the level of the "war on terror" to become a full-scale war, 
and the talk about conditions for stationing USFK appears to be 
nothing more than a cheap ploy to legitimize deployment by provoking 
citizens' anxieties about national security.  If some of the USFK 
 
SEOUL 00001739  004 OF 007 
 
 
are transferred to Afghanistan, it would be in accordance with the 
"strategic flexibility" agreement between South Korea and the U.S. 
and has nothing to do with the issue of South Korean troop 
deployments to Afghanistan, something that Yu Myung-hwan surely 
knows better than anyone. 
 
For the Lee Administration to rush into a decision on its military 
deployment at this point in time cannot be read as anything but an 
attempt to curry favor with the U.S. prior to U.S. President Barack 
Obama's upcoming visit to the ROK.  Seeing the government 
endangering young lives by redeploying forces even as the U.S. 
itself remains undecided on additional deployments, one cannot help 
asking who the Lee Administration really represents.  The Lee 
Administration should cancel plans for redeployment. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
TIME FOR DIALOGUE NOT OPLAN 5029 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, November 2, 2009, Page 27) 
 
OPLAN 5029, the South Korea-U.S. Combined Forces Command operational 
plan that serves as a blueprint for dealing with a "sudden change" 
in North Korea's political situation, is once again becoming the 
topic of controversy.  Yesterday, the Yonhap News reported a 
high-ranking source in the government as saying that the plan's 
draft is based on five or six scenarios of upheaval in North Korea, 
including the outflow of nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD), a civil war resulting from a regime change or 
coup d'etat, a South Korean hostage incident within North Korea, a 
large-scale defection of North Korean residents, and a large-scale 
natural disaster.  South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff issued an 
immediate denial statement calling the account "contrary to the 
facts," while officials with the Cheong Wa Dae (the presidential 
office in South Korea or Blue House) and Defense Ministry have 
either refused to comment or have given an answer along the lines 
of, "We have had an agreement with the U.S. regarding OPLAN 5029 in 
place since last year."  In other words, they have effectively 
acknowledged that some exchange has taken place behind the scenes. 
It also follows along with an Oct. 30 remark made by General Walter 
Sharp, U.S. Forces Korea Commander, that the two countries have 
agreed that, even after wartime operational command has been 
transferred to South Korea., the U.S. military will take the 
initiative in any elimination of North Korean WMDs and in any Marine 
Corps assault landing. 
 
Close cooperation and thorough planning between South Korea and the 
U.S. to prepare for the possibility of internal strife in North 
Korea are necessary.  However, it is exceedingly dangerous to make 
preparations that emphasize military operations. Even if some sudden 
upheaval should arise in North Korea, it could settle down of its 
own accord over time, and there are always ways to calm the 
situation that do not involve military operations, including 
international cooperation and inter-Korean dialogue.  OPLAN 5029, 
which presumes military operations in the event of an upheaval in 
North Korea, could very likely shut off a path to a peaceful 
resolution and provoke a war.  There are also quite a number of 
sensitive issues that need to be considered, including the lack of 
agreement between the U.S.  and its focus on eliminating nuclear 
weapons and other WMDs, and South Korea and its focus on preventing 
war, as well as the sovereignty dispute between the two countries 
over operational command and the possibility of international 
warfare resulting from Chinese intervention.  It is for these very 
reasons that discussions had been limited to conceptual plans 
instead of extending into operational plans during the Roh Moo-hyun 
Administration. 
 
Currently, the trend in the political situation on the Korean 
Peninsula has been to move away from sanctions and towards dialogue 
following Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao's visit to North Korea. 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, whose rumored ill health the South 
Korean government considered the most important factor influencing a 
potential North Korean upheaval, has been confirmed through various 
 
SEOUL 00001739  005 OF 007 
 
 
channels to be quite well. Now is the time for our government to 
focus all its energies on restoring inter-Korean dialogue in order 
to avoid falling behind the international current, rather than 
fixating on a revival of OPLAN 5029, which could easily lead to the 
calamity of war. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
WILL ROK AND U.S. PUSH AHEAD WITH OPCON TRANSFER? 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 2, 2009, Page 35) 
 
USFK Commander Gen. Walter Sharp said last week that even after the 
OPCON transfer and the dissolution of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces 
in 2012, the U.S. military will be taking the initiative in any 
elimination of North Korean WMDs and in a Marine Corps assault 
landing.  He stated at an international conference, hosted by the 
Council on Korea-U.S. Security Studies and the Dong-a 
Ilbo-affiliated Hwajeong Peace Foundation, "The ROK and the U.S. 
recently reached the agreement, considering that the ROK does not 
have the military capability to carry out such special operations." 
In a situation where the ROK military is undergoing difficulty 
securing its own sophisticated military capability, Gen. Sharp's 
remarks considerably eased public anxiety over national security. 
 
In the event of an emergency, we must destroy about 1,000 targets in 
the North, such as nuclear arsenals, missile launch bases and major 
command posts.  Our military capability is, however, not enough to 
hit these targets accurately and quickly.  State-of-the art bombers, 
aircraft and cruise missiles must be mobilized from all around the 
world, including the U.S. territories and U.S. military bases in 
Japan.  Aegis destroyers and interceptor missiles are also needed to 
counter a missile attack by North Korea.  It is virtually impossible 
to handle these high-tech weapons on the Korean Peninsula without a 
U.S. commander.  In that the ROK and the U.S. acknowledged the 
realistic limits (of the OPCON transfer) and came up with military 
alternatives, Gen. Sharp's statements are somewhat comforting. 
 
Gen. Sharp noted, "If the operational control is transferred, the 
ROK-U.S. combined army and navy forces will be led by an ROK 
commander, and the combined air force will be led by the commander 
of the 7th U.S. Air Force in Korea, both under the control of the 
ROK Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff."  This is a type of role 
division.  However, this means that the unitary command system under 
the commander of ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command (CFC), a position 
held by the USFK commander, will be separated into two systems in a 
more multi-layered and complicated way.  Even if the U.S. military 
leads key landing operations and operations to remove weapons of 
mass destruction, joint operations may not go smoothly in general. 
 
The U.S. repeatedly declared that it would establish a new military 
cooperation system in place of the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command 
and would continue to provide nuclear deterrence and complementary 
war capabilities to the ROK.  However, Gen. Sharp's statement 
confirmed once again that the ROK's sole exercise of operational 
control would be limited.  Therefore, we wonder whether we really 
need to push ahead with the early transfer of operational control. 
It would likely only weaken the combined defense capabilities. 
 
The ROK and the U.S. should confront our security situation and the 
level of our military power and start again from the beginning in 
reassessing the timing for the OPCON transfer. 
 
 
GUARD FORCES ARE NOT COMBATANT FORCES 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 31, 2009, page 31) 
 
The ROKG announced on October 30 that it will increase the number of 
Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) personnel to 150 from the 
current 24 and send police officers and guard forces to protect 
them.  The ROKG did not reveal the size (of the contingent), but 
sources say that 200 to 300 troops and police officers will be 
deployed to Afghanistan.  A Foreign Ministry Spokesman said that new 
 
SEOUL 00001739  006 OF 007 
 
 
PRT members will work to enhance the administrative capabilities of 
the local government, rebuild the economy, establish social 
infrastructure and provide humanitarian support.  He added, "Troops 
and police will devote themselves to defense and will not take part 
in combat operations." 
 
The ROKG sent 200 military medics and engineers to Afghanistan in 
2002 but pulled them out of the country in late 2007.  Early next 
year, ROK troops will again be sent to Afghanistan to protect PRT 
personnel. 
 
Medics and engineers withdrew after 20 ROK missionaries were taken 
hostage by armed rebels and two of them were killed.  This is why 
ROK people may raise concerns over redeployment of troops even 
though they will be dispatched only for self-defense. 
 
The troops and police officers to be deployed this time are not 
combat forces.  Other countries have also sent military and police 
forces for protection when they sent their PRT to help with the 
rebuilding work in Afghanistan.  Currently, there are 68,000 U.S. 
troops and 100,000 military forces from 40 countries in Afghanistan. 
 With battles with militants, such as the Taliban, becoming 
increasingly fierce, however, they are not in a position to ensure 
the safety of the PRTs from each country.  It is essential that the 
ROK deploy troops to protect its PRT. 
 
The ROK ranks among the top 15 economies in the world and will host 
the next G20 summit.  What would have become of the ROK without 
international support during the Korean War and afterwards?  The 
ROK, which is so indebted to the international community, should not 
neglect to help others.  We will not be able to play a leading role 
(in international relations) and gain true international recognition 
if we turn a blind eye to the world's most urgent issues such as the 
war in Afghanistan. 
 
The ROKG should make sure that its planned troop deployment is not 
(intended) for military involvement but is aimed at helping rebuild 
Afghanistan.  In particular, we should be cautious not to incite the 
Islamic nations.  The National Assembly also should discuss this 
matter while considering the safety of personnel being sent there 
and the ROK's national interest. 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
POLL: SIXTY PERCENT SAY CONSTITUTIONAL COURT RULING ON MEDIA REFORM 
LEGISLATION IS WRONG 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, November 2, 2009, Page 5) 
 
By Reporter Park Chang-ik 
 
Research Plus poll shows that the Four Major Rivers Restoration 
Project is the most unpopular Lee Administration project, and that 
concern about protecting freedom of expression is spreading among 
young voters 
 
In the Oct. 28 National Assembly by-elections, the Grand National 
Party (GNP) suffered complete defeat in strategic regions such as 
the Seoul area and Chungcheong Provinces.  In consideration of these 
recent results combined with President Lee Myung-bak's relatively 
high approval rating, there is an increased interest in the real 
undercurrents of public opinion. 
 
An opinion poll conducted Saturday by Research Plus at the behest of 
the Hankyoreh put forward six controversial Lee Administration 
policies and asked respondents to indicate which ones they found 
most problematic.  The overwhelming top choice regardless of region, 
age or political party support is the Four Major Rivers Restoration 
Project at 41.4 percent. 
 
When broken down by age groups, 48.1 percent of those in their 30s 
and 53.7 percent of those in their 40s chose the Four Major Rivers 
Restoration Project as the most problematic.  Those in their 50s and 
 
SEOUL 00001739  007 OF 007 
 
 
60s count the Four Major Rivers Restoration Project as the most 
problematic, but at lower levels of 37.3 percent and 29.8 percent, 
respectively.  It is noteworthy that those in their 30s and 40s, the 
age brackets that drive public opinion, are most strongly opposed to 
the Four Major Rivers Restoration Project.  The poll also confirms 
that negative feelings towards the Four Major Rivers Restoration 
Project increase in relation to an increase in education levels and 
income. 
 
The second and third choices are the handling of the media-related 
legislation (11.2 percent) and the press policy that includes the 
ousting of television hosts (MCs) Kim Je-dong and Son Seok-hee (8.9 
percent).  It is noteworthy that 19.8 percent of those in their 20s 
and 16.7 percent of those in their 30s list the railroading of the 
media related bills through the National Assembly as most 
problematic.  Some 15.8 percent of those in their 20s indicate the 
ousting of Kim Je-dong and Son Seok-hee as the most problematic. 
This reveals that concerns about violations of freedom of expression 
have spread widely among those in their 20s and 30s.  The remaining 
list of problematic issues include the emphasis on pushing through 
the reduced Sejong City Development Plan (8.5 percent), the handling 
of the Yongsan tragedy (7.8 percent) and the labor policy that 
includes the banning of wages to full-time unionists (5.6 percent). 
 
This strong concern among young people about (possible infringements 
of) the freedom of expression is also revealed in response to 
questions about the Constitutional Court's recent decision on the 
media reform legislation.  Some 60.4 percent of respondents feel 
that the Constitutional Court's decision was wrong.  On this same 
survey item, 74.7 percent of those their 20s, 71.8 percent of those 
in their 30s and 66.8 percent of those in their 40s feel the 
decision was wrong.  Moreover, 71.3 percent of those currently 
enrolled in a university and 67 percent of those with undergraduate 
degrees or higher believe the decision was wrong, and 71.3 percent 
of those making more than 4 million Won per month also believe the 
decision was wrong.  Opinions regarding the Constitutional Court's 
decision on the media reform legislation grow more negative as 
education levels and income increase. 
 
On the policy of redeploying troops to Afghanistan, opposition (49.8 
percent) was slightly higher than support (42.4 percent).  Men and 
women were at odds, with 54.4 percent of men supporting the troop 
deployment and 41.3 percent opposing it, and 30.8 percent of women 
supporting it and 58.0 percent opposing it. 
 
The phone survey results are taken from a nationwide sample of 1000 
adults, 19 years old and older.  The results indicate a margin of 
error of plus or minus 3.1 percent at a confidence level of 95 
percent. 
 
 
 
STEPHENS
</file>