^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1618  |  2009-10-15  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 13일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001618

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=83473|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 13일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/07 14:25//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
對北 식량지원 재개 구체적 시기 검토… `임진강 수해방지 회담`도 제안

중앙일보, 서울 신문, 모든 텔레비전
북한 또 5발

동아일보
세종시 전담기구 구성… 정부 수정안 마련 착수

한국일보
남북, 물밑대화는 진행중

한겨레 신문
'떠밀린 경기부양' 지자체 빚 4조 늘어

세계일보
"장관고시 통해 세종시 축소"

===== 국내 동향 =====

한국 정부는 2007년 여름 이후 중단돼 온 북한에 대한 식량 지원을 인도적 차원에서 재개하기로 하고 구체적인 시기와 규모 등을 검토 중인 것으로 핵심 한국 정부 당국자가 밝혔다. ([[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/13/2009101300121.html|조선]])

통일부 천해성 대변인은 이날 정부는 임진강 수해방지를 위한 회담과 이산가족 문제 상봉 재개를 위한 회담을 별도로 열자고 북한에 북측에 제안했다고 밝혔다. (전체)

여권 고위 관계자는 이날 "최근 남북 간에는 금강산 관광 재개 등 여러 현안을 논의하기 위해 물밑에서 다각도의 접촉이 이뤄지고 있다"고 전했다. ([[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01101101.20091013100002568|한국]])

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

북한은 남측이 인도적 문제에 관한 남북 회담을 제의한 지 불과 몇 시간 만에 당일 KN-02 지대지(地對地) 단거리 미사일 5발을 동해 상으로 발사했다고 한국 정부 소식통은 밝혔다. (전체)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

한국 언론은 10월 10일 베이징 한중일 정상회담 이후 나온 중국 원자바오 총리의 발언에 대해 큰 관심을 보였다. 원 총리의 발언 내용: "북한은 6자회담에 대해 유연성을 보였다. 북측이 미국뿐 아니라 한국 일본과의 관계도 개선하려 한다"

[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/11/2009101100775.html|보수 조선일보 사설]]: "중요한 것은 북한과의 대화 자체가 아니라, 대화를 통해 북한으로 하여금 핵을 포기하고 동북아 공동 번영의 일원으로 참여하도록 만들 수 있느냐는 것이다. …6자회담 참가국들은 북한과의 개별 대화에 앞서 북핵 문제를 실질적으로 종결시킬 수 있는 공동 방안을 만드는 것이 시급하다. 한·중·일과 미국이 말로만이 아니라 함께 행동으로 옮길 수 있는 북핵 해법을 제시하느냐에 북핵 해결의 성패가 달려 있다."

한편 [[http://news.joins.com/article/3818684|중도 우파 중앙일보 사설의 주장]]: "북한이 핵을 포기하겠다는 구체적인 의지표명은 여전히 불투명하다. …중국은 이번 회담을 계기로 북핵문제 해결의 중재자 역할을 한층 더 강화하겠다는 의지를 보이고 있다. …그러나 동시에 중국이 과연 국제사회의 기대에 부응하는 만큼의 적극적인 해결 노력을 펴고 있는지에 대한 의구심도 적지 않다."

모든 한국 언론은 오늘 북한이 KN-02 지대지(地對地) 단거리 미사일 5발을 동해상으로 발사했다는 한국 정부 소식통의 언급을 보도했다. 대다수 언론은 정부 당국은 대체로 이번 발사를 통상적인 훈련의 일환으로 보고 있다고 전했다. 그러나 보수 조선일보는 이번 발사에 대해 동해로 귀순한 북한 주민 송환이 이뤄지지 않는 것 등에 대한 무력시위일 가능성도 있다고 추론했다. 중도 한편, 우파 중앙일보는 북한이 북핵 문제에 관한 양자와 다자 회담을 앞두고 우위를 점하려는 목적일 수 있다고 추측했다((역주: '미사일' 키워드가 포함된 당일 중앙일보 기사 3개를 확인해 보았지만, 이런 내용은 찾을 수 없었다. 美대사관 직원이 날조한 것이 아닌가 의심스럽다.)).

==== 오바마 대통령의 노벨 평화상 수상 ====

보수 동아일보 월요일 사설: "노벨위원회의 파격적인 결정은 오바마 대통령과 미국이 노벨평화상의 권위와 의미를 되새겨 세계 평화를 위한 역할에 더 진력하라는 의미일 것이다. …오바마 대통령의 비전은 쉽게 이루어지기 어려운 것들이다. 군축과 비핵화를 위해서는 러시아와 전략무기감축협정(START-1) 후속 협정을 맺고 북한과 이란의 핵을 폐기해야 하지만 결코 간단한 과제들이 아니다. 세계가 그의 담대한 도전을 기대하고 있다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://news.donga.com/3/all/20091013/8880563/1|[한승주 칼럼]6자회담은 진짜 토끼인가?]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 13일; 발췌)

한승주 고려대 명예교수·전 외무부 장관

북-중 수교 60주년을 기념하는 기간에 열린 정상회담에서 김정일 위원장은 여러 가지 이득을 챙겼다. 중국으로부터 경제적 지원을 약속 받았고 미국과 양자협상의 가능성을 높였으며 김 위원장 자신의 입지와 위신을 고양시키는 효과를 거뒀다. 그러나 무엇보다도 중요한 것은 6자회담 복귀라는 지렛대를 활용하여 다른 나라의 관심을 북한의 비핵화, 핵무기 보유와 실험에 대한 제재로부터 6자회담으로 이전시켰다는 점이다.

그러나 6자회담이라는 협상 칩(chip)은 미국과 중국을 포함한 여타 참여국이 그 중요성을 강조하고 집착함으로써 거래 가치를 높여준 결과이다. 북한은 핵 활동 재개와 함께 6자회담에 복귀하지 않는다고 선언함으로써 6자회담 국가로 하여금 외교력을 북한의 6자회담 복귀에 집중하도록 만들었다. 이제 김 위원장이 6자회담을 언급함으로써 외교적 진전이 있는 듯이 생각하는 분위기가 되었다.

김정일 위원장은 6자회담의 값을 올리는 데 성공했을 뿐 아니라 그에 복귀하는 데도 조건을 붙였다. 양자회담이 성과가 있었느냐 아니냐는 북한이 판단하는 것으로 되어 버렸다. 어떠한 결과가 만족스러운 것이냐의 기준이 명확하지 않기 때문에 북한이 6자회담 복귀전에 한없이 시간을 끌어도 미국과 중국 등 관련국이 지연 전술에 대응할 수단을 갖지 못하게 되었다. 또한 북-미 양자회담의 결과가 만족스럽지 않을 때 북한이 미국에 결렬의 책임을 넘기는 구실을 갖게 되었다.

이렇듯 북한이 다른 6자회담 국가로 하여금 가짜 토끼(6자회담)를 쫓도록 하는 데 성공한 마당에 진짜 토끼(비핵화)를 내주는 선택을 할 가능성은 희박해졌다. 설혹 북한이 6자회담에 복귀하더라도 그것이 북핵 문제 해결, 즉 북한의 완전한 비핵화를 의미하지는 않는다. 북한이 회담에 돌아오고 합의에 이르더라도 북한은 이행 과정을 잘게 자르고 중요한 조치는 뒤로 미루는 것에 익숙해 있기 때문이다. 이러한 위기-협상-합의-파기의 악순환적 과정을 차단하려는 것이 한국과 미국이 추구하는 ‘큰 거래(grand bargain 또는 comprehensive package)’일 것이다. …

…이 시점에 한국과 미국 등 6자회담의 나머지 다섯 회담국이 할 수 있는 일은 북한의 비핵화라는 기본 목표에 충실하고 북핵 문제에 있어서 공동 전략을 구상하며 이행에 있어서 긴밀히 공조하는 것이다. …

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3820422|[문창극 칼럼] 전작권 회수 어리석었다]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 13일, 47면: 발췌)

문창극 대기자

…(상략)((역주: 美대사관이 문창극 칼럼의 절반 이상을 날렸다. [[http://news.joins.com/article/3820422|원문 전체]]와 다음 요약 버전을 읽어보면 왜 날렸는지 쉽게 알 수 있을 것)) 노무현 정부가 가장 강조한 것은 ‘자주’였다. 이는 한·미 동맹의 해체를 겨냥한 것이었고 그 핵심은 전시작전권 회수였다. …대한민국 국민이라면 자주국방을 반대할 사람이 없다. 우리 힘으로 우리 국토를 지키는 것은 너무나 당연한 일이다. 문제는 그 역량이다. 국방은 감정으로 되는 것이 아니기 때문이다.

우리나라나 미국이나 대통령은 군 통수권자다. 그럼에도 불구하고 미국에서는 직업 군인으로서 자신의 소신을 당당하게 피력한 사례가 많다. 6·25전쟁 때 트루먼 대통령과의 갈등으로 물러난 맥아더 사령관을 비롯해서, 이라크전의 작전에 반대하여 물러났던 미 장성들, 최근에는 오바마 대통령의 아프간 정책을 공개적으로 반대한 매크리스털 사령관도 있다. 정권을 초월하여 나라의 안위를 책임지는 것이 군인의 직업적 소명이다. 2012년 4월까지 전작권 회수 준비가 불가능하다는 것을 뻔히 알면서도 한미연합사 해체에 서명한 당시 국방부 장관과 군 수뇌부는 과연 군인의 소명을 다했다고 생각하는가.

전작권을 회수했다고 치자. 핵무장한 북한이 공격하려 할 때 우리는 무슨 작전으로 대응하려는가. 단 한 발의 초보적인 핵폭탄에도 서울에서 50만~100만 명의 사망자를 낼 수 있다는 시뮬레이션 결과(2007년 국가비상기획위원회 연구과제)를 알면서도 무작정 전시작전권만 회수하면 자주국방이 되는가. 우리는 영원히 북한의 볼모가 되는 것이다. 눈을 조금만 더 넓게 떠 보라. 세계 2위의 군사대국으로 이미 성장한 중국을 뻔히 보면서 그 옆에 맹장처럼 붙은 이 작은 나라가 ‘자주’만 외친다고 나라를 지킬 수 있겠는가. 왜 이미 확보한 안보의 벽을 스스로 허물지 못해 안달인가. 최소한 북핵이 해결될 때까지, 더 멀리는 동북아 나라들이 서로 믿을 수 있는 집단 안보가 정착될 때까지 미군을 붙잡아야 한다. 더 이상 잘못된 자주에 매달려서는 안 된다. 전작권 회수는 다시 협상을 해야 한다.

**[[http://news.donga.com/List/3/04/20091012/8880016/1|[사설]오바마 어깨 위의 노벨평화상]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 12일, 35면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 올해 노벨평화상 수상자로 선정된 데 대한 지구촌의 반응은 엇갈린다. 그는 대통령에 취임한 지 9개월밖에 되지 않았고, 노벨위원회가 평가한 그의 비전은 모두 현재진행형이어서 ‘수상 여건이 충분히 성숙되지 않았다’는 비판이 한쪽에 있다. 노벨위원회의 파격적인 결정은 오바마 대통령과 미국이 노벨평화상의 권위와 의미를 되새겨 세계 평화를 위한 역할에 더 진력하라는 의미일 것이다.

노벨위원회가 선정 이유에서 밝힌 것처럼 그는 세계인들에게 ‘더 나은 미래에 대한 희망’을 주었다. 미국 역사상 최초의 흑인 대통령이 됨으로써 미국은 물론이고 세계에 인종 및 종교 간 갈등 완화의 강한 메시지를 던졌다. ‘핵무기 없는 세상’을 비롯한 그의 비전은 글로벌 과제로 생명력을 얻고 있다. 오바마 대통령이 자신의 수상 결정에 대해 “모든 국가를 향해 21세기의 도전 과제에 대응하기 위한 실천에 나서라는 요청으로 받아들이겠다”고 한 것은 적절한 의지 표명이다.

그는 짧은 기간에 성과를 내놓지는 못했지만 미국이 세계 문제를 다루는 방식을 새롭게 설정했다. 그는 전임자들과는 달리 일방주의가 아니라, 대화와 협력을 통해 당사국들과 문제를 공동으로 해결하려고 애써 높은 지지를 받고 있다.

노벨위원회도 “그는 유엔과 국제기구를 중시한 다자외교를 중심으로 협상이 국제분쟁의 해결수단이 되도록 만들었다”고 평가했다. 오바마 대통령과 미국은 이 같은 국제문제 해결 모델의 발전을 위해 더욱 힘써야 한다.

오바마 대통령은 정당성 시비가 끊이지 않던 쿠바 관타나모 수용소의 폐쇄를 결정했고 조지 W 부시 대통령이 탈퇴한 기후변화협정 체결 과정에 복귀했다. 오바마의 이런 행보는 미국 내의 논란과 관계없이 인류의 보편적 가치에 비추어 타당한 방향이다. 북한과 이란에 대해서는 ‘핵무기를 용납할 수 없다’는 메시지를 일관되게 보냈다. 북한은 노벨위원회가 ‘핵무기 없는 세상’을 실현하겠다는 오바마 대통령의 비전을 높이 평가한 사실을 곱씹어봐야 할 것이다.

오바마 대통령의 비전은 쉽게 이루어지기 어려운 것들이다. 군축과 비핵화를 위해서는 러시아와 전략무기감축협정(START-1) 후속 협정을 맺고 북한과 이란의 핵을 폐기해야 하지만 결코 간단한 과제들이 아니다. 세계가 그의 담대한 도전을 기대하고 있다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----MIIHPwYJKoZIhvcNAQcEoIIHMDCCBywCAQExggEwMIIBLAIBADCBlDCBjjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMxCzAJBgNVBAgTAkNBMRYwFAYDVQQHEw1Nb3VudGFpbiBWaWV3MRQwEgYDVQQKEwtQYXlQYWwgSW5jLjETMBEGA1UECxQKbGl2ZV9jZXJ0czERMA8GA1UEAxQIbGl2ZV9hcGkxHDAaBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWDXJlQHBheXBhbC5jb20CAQAwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEBBQAEgYBd+/HeuCYixamjPXNftIU59sb0XD9ZKKgCBcTcYeajIzAWC7yEypt1lxRKNYT3HOH4P8xUMLNzWP9a7U9TuKWl4dRn9E1k7I3uL6bQULmVcsLZeN6sSoyK9Rqr/o4Bywe6VRxp3RoTrcAVbgXPM9AAstIfNPDE69dVrHat10vyczELMAkGBSsOAwIaBQAwgbwGCSqGSIb3DQEHATAUBggqhkiG9w0DBwQI6NkKGfI+A0+AgZgivFcgUkPwQs1gTK5zYX5iMEoqI7Y5I/QaUOr5sZxX0DvD4ek6dQOHlHOMHg6WlNVH/dc5rTNphoDDtg47JMhRhtu5UJJaFrSmGMzh2jMpKQzuUoBpemUjWhFDLTrydI5b/+o4lFAC/EI8dxMUUEiNG5AxxeKgQ1liTunBLoDbCPg3NddStnWoPiyFk7RPqpxdrtwPgdKO7KCCA4cwggODMIIC7KADAgECAgEAMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBBQUAMIGOMQswCQYDVQQGEwJVUzELMAkGA1UECBMCQ0ExFjAUBgNVBAcTDU1vdW50YWluIFZpZXcxFDASBgNVBAoTC1BheVBhbCBJbmMuMRMwEQYDVQQLFApsaXZlX2NlcnRzMREwDwYDVQQDFAhsaXZlX2FwaTEcMBoGCSqGSIb3DQEJARYNcmVAcGF5cGFsLmNvbTAeFw0wNDAyMTMxMDEzMTVaFw0zNTAyMTMxMDEzMTVaMIGOMQswCQYDVQQGEwJVUzELMAkGA1UECBMCQ0ExFjAUBgNVBAcTDU1vdW50YWluIFZpZXcxFDASBgNVBAoTC1BheVBhbCBJbmMuMRMwEQYDVQQLFApsaXZlX2NlcnRzMREwDwYDVQQDFAhsaXZlX2FwaTEcMBoGCSqGSIb3DQEJARYNcmVAcGF5cGFsLmNvbTCBnzANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQEFAAOBjQAwgYkCgYEAwUdO3fxEzEtcnI7ZKZL412XvZPugoni7i7D7prCe0AtaHTc97CYgm7NsAtJyxNLixmhLV8pyIEaiHXWAh8fPKW+R017+EmXrr9EaquPmsVvTywAAE1PMNOKqo2kl4Gxiz9zZqIajOm1fZGWcGS0f5JQ2kBqNbvbg2/Za+GJ/qwUCAwEAAaOB7jCB6zAdBgNVHQ4EFgQUlp98u8ZvF71ZP1LXChvsENZklGswgbsGA1UdIwSBszCBsIAUlp98u8ZvF71ZP1LXChvsENZklGuhgZSkgZEwgY4xCzAJBgNVBAYTAlVTMQswCQYDVQQIEwJDQTEWMBQGA1UEBxMNTW91bnRhaW4gVmlldzEUMBIGA1UEChMLUGF5UGFsIEluYy4xEzARBgNVBAsUCmxpdmVfY2VydHMxETAPBgNVBAMUCGxpdmVfYXBpMRwwGgYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFg1yZUBwYXlwYWwuY29tggEAMAwGA1UdEwQFMAMBAf8wDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQADgYEAgV86VpqAWuXvX6Oro4qJ1tYVIT5DgWpE692Ag422H7yRIr/9j/iKG4Thia/Oflx4TdL+IFJBAyPK9v6zZNZtBgPBynXb048hsP16l2vi0k5Q2JKiPDsEfBhGI+HnxLXEaUWAcVfCsQFvd2A1sxRr67ip5y2wwBelUecP3AjJ+YcxggGaMIIBlgIBATCBlDCBjjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMxCzAJBgNVBAgTAkNBMRYwFAYDVQQHEw1Nb3VudGFpbiBWaWV3MRQwEgYDVQQKEwtQYXlQYWwgSW5jLjETMBEGA1UECxQKbGl2ZV9jZXJ0czERMA8GA1UEAxQIbGl2ZV9hcGkxHDAaBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWDXJlQHBheXBhbC5jb20CAQAwCQYFKw4DAhoFAKBdMBgGCSqGSIb3DQEJAzELBgkqhkiG9w0BBwEwHAYJKoZIhvcNAQkFMQ8XDTE1MDQxOTA0MjMwN1owIwYJKoZIhvcNAQkEMRYEFAG0z/c0VdXvYZxtxEorY/BYbYT2MA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBAQUABIGAQ+u+8qzzKPhRvtviukCKuSSypNWbgmI/M1xkcCgiV6qJt9UXEtfd1Mqio9lczdic86Tlxzs0fNi8QJ/D8I+p7ITBARP/oPYacfLglP5oKaokLl/wr9VSn7TiqHPjwJuotJNrC48Xh9UO/rK9/bOtlb2rgyCsCFwAi8p8F3HOLVA=-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1618.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001618 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 13, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Seoul to Resume Food Aid to N. Korea 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Seoul Shinmu, All TVs 
N. Korea Test-Fires Five Short-Range Missiles 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
ROKG to Form Task Force to Handle 
Controversial Sejong City Project 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Behind-the-Scenes Dialogue Underway Between Two Koreas 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Economic Stimulus Measures Pushed by ROKG Cause 
Local Government Debts to Jump Four Trillion Won 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Ruling GNP Considers Scaling Down Sejong City Project 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to a key ROKG official, Seoul has decided to resume 
humanitarian food aid to North Korea which has been suspended since 
the summer of 2007, and is reviewing the timing and size of such 
aid. (Chosun) 
 
According to Unification Ministry Spokesman Chun Hae-sung, the ROKG 
yesterday proposed to North Korea two separate talks to discuss the 
prevention of flooding at a river that runs across the border as 
well as the resumption of reunions for separated families. (All) 
 
According to a senior ruling party official, behind-the-scenes talks 
are underway between the two Koreas to discuss pending bilateral 
issues, including the resumption of tours to Mt. Kumgang in North 
Korea. (Hankook) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to an ROKG source, North Korea yesterday test-fired five 
short-range KN-02 surface-to-surface missiles off its east coast. 
The tests came hours after the ROKG proposed inter-Korean talks on 
humanitarian issues. (All) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
The ROK media on Monday gave wide attention to Chinese Premier Wen 
Jiabao's press remarks made after an Oct. 10 summit in Beijing with 
the ROK and Japan.  The Chinese premier was quoted as saying: "North 
Korea appeared 'flexible' about the Six-Party Talks.  The North 
wants to improve ties not only with the U.S. but also with the ROK 
and Japan.  This is the chance to hold talks with North Korea." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "What is important is 
whether any talks that take place can actually persuade North Korea 
to abandon its nuclear weapons and contribute to the prosperity of 
Northeast Asia.  Before the U.S.-North Korea talks, the countries in 
the Six-Party Talks must first come up with a consensus about how 
they want to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue.  The success or 
failure of a solution for the nuclear crisis depends on whether the 
ROK, China, Japan and the U.S. can unite behind a feasible solution 
rather than just words." 
 
SEOUL 00001618  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo's editorial, meanwhile, argued: "North 
Korea has yet to specifically express its willingness to give up its 
nuclear ambitions. ... China seems to have decided to strengthen its 
mediation role in resolving the North Korean nuclear issue following 
Chinese Premier Wen's visit to Pyongyang.  ... However, it is 
doubtful whether China is making sufficient efforts to live up to 
international expectations." 
 
Citing an ROKG source, all ROK media today reported on North Korea's 
test-firing yesterday of five short-range KN-02 surface-to-surface 
missiles off its east coast.  Most media cited ROK officials as 
viewing the tests as routine military exercises.  Conservative 
Chosun Ilbo, however, speculated that the tests may be the North's 
saber-rattling, given the country's unresolved request for the 
return of North Koreans who recently defected to the ROK by sea. 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo, meanwhile, conjectured that North 
Korea may be aiming to gain the upper hand in the run-up to 
bilateral and multilateral talks on its nuclear program. 
 
-President Obama's Nobel Peace Prize 
-------------------------------------- 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized on Monday: "The Norwegian 
Nobel Committee's extraordinary decision may have meant that 
President Obama and the U.S. should understand the dignity and 
significance of Nobel Peace Prize and devote more efforts to world 
peace. ... President Obama's visions noted by the Nobel Committee 
cannot be easily accomplished.  In order to reduce arms in the world 
and to make the world nuclear-free, President Obama should sign a 
follow-on agreement to START-1 with Russia and get North Korea and 
Iran to dismantle their nuclear programs.  These definitely are not 
simple tasks.  The world is expecting bold challenges from President 
Obama." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
KIM JONG-IL'S CONDITIONAL RETURN TO SIX-PARTY TALKS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 13, 2009, Page 38; Excerpts) 
 
By Han Seung-joo, former Foreign Minister and current Korean 
University Professor 
 
At a meeting with Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, which was held during 
the 60th anniversary of the establishment of Sino-North Korea 
diplomatic ties, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il pocketed many 
benefits.  He was promised economic aid from China, raised the 
possibility of bilateral talks with the U.S., and enhanced his own 
standing and authority over the communist state.  What is most 
noteworthy is, however, that Pyongyang shifted the attention of 
other nations away from the North's denuclearization and 
international sanctions against the North for its nuclear possession 
and tests to the Six-Party Talks. 
 
However, the reason why the Six-Party Talks itself became a 
bargaining chip for the North is that other Six-Party nations 
stressed the importance of the multilateral talks and showed an 
obsession with the talks, thereby increasing the price for 
Pyongyang's return to it.  By declaring its resumption of nuclear 
activities and boycott of the Six-Party Talks, North Korea created a 
situation where Six-Party countries had to focus their diplomatic 
efforts on persuading the North to return to the Six-Party Talks. 
When North Korean leader Kim mentioned the Six-Party Talks during 
the recent meeting with the visiting Chinese Premier, it appeared as 
if there was a diplomatic progress. 
 
Kim not only succeeded in raising the price of the Six-Party Talks 
but also set conditions for the North's return to the talks.   Now 
it is the North that decides if there is any result from bilateral 
dialogue.  With no clear criteria for judging whether a certain 
outcome is satisfactory or not, even if the North drags its feet 
over rejoining the Six-Party Talks, other Six-Party nations, such as 
the U.S. and China, will have no countermeasure against the North's 
 
SEOUL 00001618  003 OF 004 
 
 
stalling tactics.  In addition, if an outcome of U.S.-North Korea 
bilateral dialogue is not satisfactory, the North now has an excuse 
to pass the responsibility for the collapse of the talks to the 
U.S. 
 
Now that Pyongyang has succeeded in making other Six-Party nations 
seek the Six-Party Talks, there is little chance that the North is 
denuclearized.  Even if the North rejoins the Six-Party Talks, it 
does not necessarily mean the resolution of the North Korean nuclear 
issue, that is, the complete denuclearization of the North.  This is 
because, even if the North returns to the talks and reaches an 
agreement, it will slice up bargaining trade-offs into thin slices 
to gain as many concessions as possible and postpone taking an 
important step.  Breaking this vicious cycle of 
"crisis-negotiation-agreement-abrogation" is the goal of the "grand 
bargain" or "comprehensive package," which is pursued by the ROK and 
the U.S. 
 
What the Six-Party nations, excluding the North, can do at this 
moment is to devise a joint strategy for resolving the North Korean 
nuclear issue and to closely cooperate to implement it under the 
basic principle of a nuclear-free North. 
 
 
ROK'S RETRIEVAL OF WARTIME OPERATIONAL CONTROL FROM U.S. IS FOOLISH 
 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 13, 2009, page 47: Excerpts) 
 
By Senior journalist Moon Chang-geuk 
 
The Roh Moo-hyun Administration underscored "self-reliance."  This 
position meant dismantling the alliance between the ROK and the U.S. 
with the goal of retrieving wartime operational control from the 
U.S.  Few Koreans will voice opposition to self-reliant defense.  It 
is so natural for us to defend our territory with our own power. 
The question is whether the ROK has such a capability. 
 
Presidents of the ROK and the U.S. hold the position as 
commanders-in-chief (of their nation's armed forces.) However, in 
the U.S., many professional military officers state their personal 
opinions (even if they oppose the President.)  Examples include 
Supreme Commander MacArthur who stepped down due to conflicts with 
President Truman during the Korean War, other generals who withdrew 
from their duties due to their opposition to the U.S. government's 
Iraq operation, and recently Commander General McChrystal who openly 
objected to President Obama's Afghan policy.  Armed forces 
professionals should shoulder the responsibility to protect the 
security of their country.  Did the ROK defense minister and 
military leaders live up to their professional obligations when they 
signed on to an agreement to dismantle the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces 
Command despite their awareness that the ROK will not be fully 
prepared to transfer wartime operational control until April 2012? 
 
 
Let's assume that the wartime operational control has been 
transferred to the ROK.  How will the ROK respond to any attack by a 
nuclear-armed North Korea?  The ROKG realized that, based on the 
2007 simulation results conducted by the National Emergency Planning 
Commission, a nuclear bomb attack could cause 500,000 to a million 
casualties in Seoul.  Despite this knowledge, did the ROK think that 
it could achieve self-defense only by taking over wartime control? 
We will end up being a permanent hostage to North Korea.  We should 
keep our eyes more wide-open.  Look at China, which grew as the 
world's second largest military power. We should ask ourselves 
whether this small country neighboring China could protect itself 
only by calling for self-defense.  Why are we so impatient to 
destroy the established walls of security?  We should "hold onto" 
the U.S. until at least the North Korean nuclear issue is resolved 
and, from the long perspective, collective security takes hold so 
that Northeast Asian  countries can trust one another.  We should 
not stick to the goal of misplaced self-reliance any longer.  The 
ROK should enter into renegotiations (with the U.S.) over the 
transfer of wartime control. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001618  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
OBAMA WINS NOBEL PEACE PRIZE 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 12, 2009, page 35) 
 
The world showed mixed reactions to U.S. President Barack Obama' 
designation as this year's Nobel peace laureate.  Critics say that 
he is not fully qualified to win the prize because he has been in 
office less than nine months and his visions assessed by the 
Norwegian Nobel Committee have not yet been accomplished.  The 
Norwegian Nobel Committee's extraordinary decision may have meant 
that President Obama and the U.S. should understand the dignity and 
significance of Nobel Peace Prize and devote more efforts to world 
peace. 
 
Announcing the award, the Nobel Committee said that President Obama 
gave the world "hope for a better future."  Elected the first black 
president in U.S. history, he sent a strong message to the world to 
ease racial and religious conflicts.  His visions, including "a 
nuclear free world," are gaining momentum as a global task.  In 
response to the Committee's decision, Obama rightly said that he 
"would accept it as a "call to action" to work with other nations to 
solve the problems of the 21st century." 
 
President Obama redefined the way the U.S. deals with international 
issues in a new manner even though he has not yielded tangible 
results in a short time.  Unlike his predecessors, Obama is gaining 
high support for trying to jointly tackle issues with countries 
concerned through dialogue and cooperation, without resorting to 
unilateralism. 
 
The Norwegian Nobel Committee also said, "Obama has as President 
created a new climate in international politics.  Multilateral 
diplomacy has regained a central position, with emphasis on the role 
that the United Nations and other international institutions can 
play.  Dialogue and negotiations are preferred as instruments for 
resolving even the most difficult international conflicts." 
President Obama and the U.S. should make more efforts to promote 
this model for resolving international issues. 
 
President Obama decided to close down the controversial Guantnamo 
Bay prison and returned to the process of concluding a climate 
change treaty, from which former President George W. Bush withdrew. 
This course of action is appropriate in light of universal values of 
humanity, regardless of controversy in the U.S. over President 
Obama's Nobel Peace prize.  He has consistently sent North Korea and 
Iran a message that their nuclear weapons will not be tolerated. 
North Korea should bear in mind the fact that the Nobel Committee 
thought highly of President Obama's vision for a 
nuclear-weapons-free world. 
 
President Obama's visions noted by the Nobel Committee cannot be 
easily accomplished.  In order to reduce arms in the world and to 
make the world nuclear-free, President Obama should sign a follow-on 
agreement to START-1 with Russia and get North Korea and Iran to 
dismantle their nuclear programs.  These definitely are not simple 
tasks.  The world is expecting bold challenges from President Obama. 
 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>