^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL502  |  2009-03-30 07:16  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 3월 30일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 08 SEOUL 000502

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 3월 30일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명)  --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2015/05/28 16:41//

===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 중앙일보, 동아일보, 모든 텔레비전.
김연아 세계선수권대회 우승 여(女)선수 첫 200점 돌파 세계 랭킹 1위 올라 

한국일보
'학자금 신불자' 1만명이 운다

한겨레 신문
성매매 혐의 입건 청와대 행정관 업체와 술판에 성접대 의혹까지

세계일보
"북(北) 로켓 안보리서 다룰 것"

서울신문
은행 주택대출 옥죈다
===== 국내 동향 =====

위성락 외교통상부 한반도평화교섭본부장은 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표와 미국과 일본의 6자회담 대표인 성 김 특사, 사이키 아키타카(齊木昭隆) 외무성 아시아대양주 국장과 회동했다. 위성락은 각국 대표들이 "북한의 로켓 발사에 따른 대처 방안을 안보리에서 논의했다"고 기자들에게 말했다. (중앙일보, 서울, 모든 텔레비전)

한국의 한 전문가는 중국과 러시아의 미온적인 태도로 말미암아 북한의 로켓 발사 이후 대북 제재에 나서지 못할 수 있다고 말했다. (한겨레, 한국)
===== 국제 뉴스 =====

로버트 게이츠 미 국방부 장관은 북한의 미사일 발사가 임박한 것으로 보이지만, 미국은 이를 요격하지 않을 것이라고 말했다. 게이츠 장관은 또 북한의 장기적인 의도가 미사일에 핵탄두를 얹으려는 것이지만, 현재로썬 북한이 그럴 능력을 갖췄을 것으로 믿진 않는다고 말했다. (조선, 중앙, 동아, 한겨레, 서울, 세계, 모든 텔레비전)

북한 노동신문은 29일 북한의 로켓 발사를 안보리에 상정해 토의하면 "보다 강한 조치를 취하게 될 것"이라고 협박했다. 전문가들은 북한이 말하는 '보다 강한 조치'는 추가 핵실험을 염두에 두었을 가능성도 있다고 말했다. (조선)

한국의 한 연구원은 북한의 로켓 발사 일자는 기상 조건에 달려 있다고 말한다. (동아) 일기 예보를 고려해보면 4월 6~8일 중에 발사가 이뤄질 것으로 예상한다. (한국)

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표는 3월 28일 북한 지도자를 만날 용의가 있음을 간접적으로 표명했다. (동아)
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

대다수 한국 미디어는 북한의 미사일 발사가 임박한 것으로 보이지만, 미국은 이를 요격하지 않을 것이라는 로버트 게이츠 미 국방부 장관의 발언을 크게 보도했다. 한국 미디어는 북한의 장기적인 의도가 미사일에 핵탄두를 얹으려는 것으로 미국은 믿고 있지만, 현재로썬 북한이 그럴 능력을 갖췄을 것으로 믿진 않는다는 게이츠 장관의 발언을 보도했다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 미국이 요격하겠다는 애초에 입장에서 후퇴한 까닭은 실패했을 경우 국제적으로 불거질 부정적인 파장 때문이 확실하다고 언급했다. 중앙일보는 대기권을 벗어나 날아가는 북한 로켓을 요격할 경우 국제관례에 위배될 수 있고 국제 사회로부터 역풍을 맞을 수 있다는 점도 고려했을 수 있다고 말했다. 중앙일보는 미국의 이러한 입장은 북한의 로켓 발사에 대한 제재 가능성에 대해 중국·러시아가 미온적인 반응을 보이는 점에서도 찾아볼 수 있다고 덧붙였다. 중앙일보는 요격의 성공 가능성에 대해서도 전문가들이 회의적인 모습이라고 말했다. 중앙일보에 의하면 “만일 요격에 실패할 경우 국제적으로 미국이 망신 당할 것"이라고 한다.

중앙일보는 관련 소식으로 위성락 외교통상부 한반도평화교섭본부장은 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표와 미국과 일본의 6자회담 대표인 성 김 특사, 사이키 아키타카(齊木昭隆) 외무성 아시아대양주 국장과 회동했다고 보도했다. 또한, 중앙은 위성락이 기자들에게 각국 대표들이 "북한의 로켓 발사에 따른 대처 방안을 안보리에서 논의했다"고 말했다고 전했다.

중도 서울 신문은 한미일 비핵 사절단 대표들이(6자 회담 수석대표) 북한의 로켓 발사는 유엔 결의 위반이라고 말했으며 북한의 로켓 발사를 유엔 안보리에 회부하는 문제를 논의했다고 말했다. 그러나 서울 신문은 북한이 인공위성을 발사하더라도 중국과 러시아가 추가 제재에 반대한다고 알려져 있기 때문에 강력한 대응 조치를 취할 가능성이 작다고 했다. 한겨레 신문도 이런 관측에 동참했다. 한겨레는 유엔 안보리가 중국과 러시아의 수동적인 태도로 인해 북한의 로켓 발사 대응책을 마련하기 어려울 수 있다고 했다.

한편 보수 조선일보는 북한 노동신문이 로켓 발사를 안보리에 상정해 토의하면 "보다 강한 조치를 취하게 될 것"이라고 29일 협박했으며 전문가들은 북한이 말하는 '보다 강한 조치'는 추가 핵실험을 염두에 두었을 가능성도 있다고 말했다고 언급했다. 조선일보는 북한의 이 같은(안보리에 회부할 경우 강한 조치) 협박 의도에 대해 "외부 압박에 밀리지 않고 발사를 강행하겠다"는 것이라고 관측통의 말을 전했다. 조선은 "발사 이후 예상되는 유엔 등의 제재를 최소화하려는 사전 방어 노력"으로 본다는 관층통의 말도 덧붙였다. 다른 관측통은 북의 이번 위협이 "6자회담을 무력화한 뒤 미·북 간 직접 대화에서 실리를 챙기려는 것"으로 보았다.

조선일보 사설: 국제사회가 한목소리로 북한에 대해 한반도 평화와 안전을 위협하는 일체의 행위를 즉각 중단하라고 촉구해야 한다. 북한이 거부할 경우 '상응하는 대가'를 치르게 될 것이라고 경고해야 한다. 북한의 연속적인 도발 행위를 막으려면 중국과 러시아가 중요할 역할을 해야 한다. 북한은 인공위성 발사라고 주장하지만, 북한의 장거리 미사일 기술을 과시하기 위한 위장임이 명백하다. 북한의 미사일 도발로 한반도 주변 군사적 긴장이 높아지고 미·일 군사태세가 강화되는 것은 중국과 러시아에도 바람직하지 않은 상황이다. 한·미·일도 대북 국제공조의 성공 여부가 중국·러시아의 동참에 달렸다는 인식 아래 북한의 로켓 발사에 반대하는 외교적 노력을 집중해야 한다.
===== 사설/논단 =====

정치권의 심기일전을 촉구한다(중앙일보, 2009년 3월 30일 47면)
이홍구 전 총리·본사고문

우리 국민은 한국과 미국의 오랜 동맹관계가 우리에게 불이익을 주고 있지 않음을 알고 있다.

국회는 국민의 자화상이다. 국민의 자유의지에 의해 우리 손으로 뽑은 국회가 아닌가. 그러기에 허구한 날 싸움판으로 날이 새는 국회의 파행을 남의 일처럼 규탄만 할 게 아니라 정치인과 국민이 함께 자성하고 고민하면서 한국 정치의 활로를 새롭게 모색해야 한다.

그러기 위해서는 스스로 만든 마음의 감옥에 갇혀 과거에 집착하는 포로가 되어서는 안 된다. 지난날에 뿌리내렸던 아집, 원한, 섭섭함, 고정관념, 경우에 따라서는 각자의 소신까지도 과감히 털어버릴 수 있는 담대한 용기를 가져야 한다.
뒤늦게 민주화된 국가들 가운데 근래에 돋보이는 성공을 거두고 있는 브라질의 룰라 대통령의 용기 있는 자세는 모범적인 사례다.

노동운동 지도자로 출발한 그는 과거에 좇았던 이념을 버리고 실용, 즉 저소득층을 포함한 전 국민의 복지 향상에 주력함으로써 국가 발전에 대한 국민적 자신감을 진작하고, 정치와 경제가 함께 굴러가는 상승 동력을 만들어냈다.

‘누구를 상대로 싸울 것이냐’보다 ‘누구와 협력하여 함께 성공을 이룰 수 있는가’에 정치적 초점을 맞춘 결과다.

이에 비해 우리는 아직도 풀지 못하고 있는 역사적 숙제들, 특히 북한과 미국에 대한 흐트러진 국민의 인식을 어떻게 광범위한 합의로 이끌 수 있느냐는 정치적 과제에 대한 해답을 찾지 못한 채 과거사의 대결적 틀에서 벗어나지 못하고 있다.

근래 한국 정치의 특징이라면 이러한 숙제에 대한 국민의 인식은 조율과 합의로 비교적 앞서가는 데 비해 정치권은 그에 순응하지 못하고 오히려 저해 요인으로 작용하고 있다는 것이다.

정치가 국민 통합을 이끄는 순기능보다는 이에 걸림돌이 되고 분열을 조장하는 역기능에 기여하고 있다는 진단에 설득력이 있다.

그렇다면 이렇듯 상당한 수준의 공감대가 형성돼 있는 우리 국민의 북한과 미국에 대한 인식은 어떠한가.

오늘의 한국사회는 60여 년간의 남북 분단에서 초래된 ‘상황의 이중성’에 대해 이미 높은 수준의 이해를 갖고 있다. 상황에 대한 적응도 매우 빠른 편이다.

남북은 각기 국가체제의 정체성과 안보를 둘러싼 고도의 대결 구도를 유지하고 있는 한편 민족의 통일과 7000만 동포 모두의 복지를 위해서는 협력해 갈 수밖에 없다는 상황의 이중성을 많은 국민은 이해하고 있다.

남북한의 경제적 차이가 크게 벌어졌다는 것, 북한은 자유·인권·개방 등 규범적 차원에서도 매우 취약한 지역이라는 것, 반면 핵무기와 미사일 개발을 통한 북한의 군사적·정치적 공세는 한반도 평화와 한국의 안보에 큰 위협이 되고 있다는 것에 대해 국민의 대다수가 특정한 이념과 관계없는 객관적 사실로 인식하고 있는 것이다.

그렇기 때문에 정치 혼란과 분열의 촉진제가 될 수 있는 태도, 예컨대 내가 원하는 통일을 위해서는 전쟁의 위험을 무릅쓰고라도 북한 체제의 붕괴를 앞당겨야만 한다든가 자유, 인권, 반독재 같은 기본가치를 한반도에선 접어둔 채 무작정 북의 지도부와 손을 잡아야 된다는 극단적인 입장은 이쯤에서 확고히 정리해야 한다.

‘친미’ ‘반미’를 놓고 국민을 분열시키는 정치권의 구시대적 행태에도 종지부를 찍어야 한다. 우리 국민은 한국과 미국의 오랜 동맹관계가 우리에게 불이익을 주고 있지 않음을 알고 있다.

미국은 우리의 안보와 경제성장에 크게 기여한 바 있는 우방이며 200만이 넘는 동포가 살고 있는 곳이라는 것도 잘 알고 있다.
냉전이 끝난 지 20년, 미국의 유일 초강대국 시대도 막을 내려가고 있는 이 시점에서 많은 OECD(경제협력개발기구) 국가들처럼 한국도 미국과의 건전한 동반자 관계를 새롭게 정립할 필요가 있다.

시대착오적인 우월감이나 열등감을 민족주의라는 이념으로 포장해 대미관계를 국민 분열의 도구로 사용하려는 구시대적인 악습은 과감히 버려야 한다.

다가오는 4월에는 다시 국회가 열린다. 정치권이 심기일전해 새로운 모습을 보여줄 때 국민은 어려운 가운데서도 힘을 얻게 될 것이다. 연일 줄을 잇는 사건들에 흔들리기보다는 국민의 상식에 순응하는 생산적 국회 운영으로 ‘우리는 할 수 있다’는 국민의 여망에 부응해주기 바란다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

[장정수칼럼] 한반도 위협하는 미·중·일 3자 대화(한겨레 신문, 2009년 3월 30일 23면)
장정수 편집인

지난 2월19일 <인터내셔널 헤럴드 트리뷴>과 <아사히신문> 인터넷 영문판에는 ‘미·중·일 3자 회담 개최돼야’라는 제하의 기고문이 실렸다. 모튼 아브라모위츠 미국 센추리재단 고문이 쓴 이 글의 요지는 세계에서 가장 역동적인 지역으로 등장한 동아시아에서 미국이 새로운 리더십을 구축하기 위해서 세계 2위, 3위의 경제대국인 일본, 중국과 긴밀하게 협력해야 한다는 것이다.

아브라모위츠는 이를 위해 오바마 대통령이 이른 시일 안에 중국 및 일본의 지도자들을 초청해 3국 정상회담을 개최해야 한다고 제안했다.

레이건 대통령 시절 국무부 정보조사 차관보를 지낸 아브라모위츠는 지난 2월3~7일 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표 등과 함께 민간대표단 자격으로 방북해 북핵 해결 방안을 논의하는 등 오바마 행정부의 대외정책에 적지 않은 영향력을 행사하고 있는 인물로 꼽힌다.

미·중·일 정상회담을 비롯한 3자 대화의 필요성은 세 나라의 동아시아 전문가들 사이에서 몇 년 전부터 꾸준히 제기돼 왔다. 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표와 절친한 사이인 아브라모위츠도 그중 한 사람이었다. 특히 미국의 동북아 정책을 주무르게 될 커트 캠벨 동아태 차관보 내정자는 그동안 공개적으로 3국 정상회담 개최의 필요성을 역설해 왔다.

아브라모위츠의 이 기고문은 한국 정부를 당혹감 속에 빠뜨렸다. 이 글이 미국 정부와의 사전 교감 속에 나온 것으로 보였기 때문이었다.

한국의 외교부 당국자들은 각종 외교 채널을 동원해 미국과 일본에 3국 정상회담 개최의 부당성을 역설한 것으로 전해진다. 이명박 대통령 취임 이후 한-미 동맹 강화에 외교적 역량을 집중해 왔던 한국에 미·중·일 정상회담은 그 자체로서도 모욕적이고 위협적인 구상이 아닐 수 없다. 세계를 사실상 지배하는 미국과 동북아의 강자인 중국 및 일본이 손잡고 한국을 배제한 채 북핵 문제와 북한 급변사태 대응을 포함해서 동북아의 주요 현안을 논의할 경우 한국으로서는 속수무책이기 때문이다.

미·중·일 3자 대화 구상의 핵심은 미국 오바마 행정부의 대중국 정책 전환이다. 일본, 인도, 오스트레일리아 등과 손잡고 추진했던 부시 정권의 대중국 봉쇄정책을 전면적으로 폐기하는 대신 강대국으로 떠오른 중국을 전략적 대화 파트너로 끌어들여 미·중·일 세 나라가 공동으로 동북아지역을 지배하자는 것이다. 그 배경에는 미국 재무증권의 최대 매입국인 중국의 협조 없이는 미국 경제의 회생이 불가능하다는 절박한 현실이 깔려 있다. 미국은 3자 대화 체제 구축에 걸림돌이 돼온 중-일 대립을 해소하고자 막후 중재자 노릇을 해 왔다. 3년 전 아베 신조 일본 총리가 취임했을 때 미국을 먼저 방문했던 관례를 깨고 중국을 먼저 방문한 것도 미국의 권고에 따른 것이었다.

이명박 정부 출범 이후 한국의 친미 노선 선회를 못마땅하게 여기는 중국은 한-미-일 3국 공조체제가 가동되는 6자 회담보다는 한국이 배제된 3자 회담에 무게를 둘 가능성이 크다. 물론 한국은 동맹국인 미국, 그리고 북한의 핵무장을 가장 우려하는 일본과 공동보조를 취할 수 있는 외교관계를 유지하고 있다. 하지만 북핵 문제를 포함한 한반도 문제가 남북한이 참여하는 6자 회담보다는 미·중·일 3자 대화에서 실질적으로 논의되는 상황은 한국과 북한 모두에게 바람직하지 않다. 최악의 경우 한반도의 운명이, 대화가 단절된 남북한이 모두 배제된 상태에서 결정될 가능성도 있기 때문이다. 남북한 양쪽은 단절된 대화의 조속한 복원과 관계 개선을 통해 동북아 안보 환경의 근본적 변화에 슬기롭게 대응해야 한다. 

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

[사설] 중국·러시아, 北 '인공위성' 주장 두둔해선 안 돼 (조선일보, 2009년 3월 30일 31면)

한국·미국·일본은 28일(현지시각) 워싱턴에서 열린 6자회담 3국 수석대표 회의에서 북한이 '인공위성 발사용 로켓'이라며 장거리 미사일 발사를 강행할 경우 유엔 안전보장이사회에 회부한다는 데 의견을 모았다고 한다. 한국측 대표인 위성락 한반도평화교섭본부장은 "우리는 북한이 어떤 것을 발사하더라도 유엔 안보리 결의 위반이라고 믿는다"고 말했다.

이에 대해 북한 노동신문은 29일 "(우리의 로켓 발사를) 안보리에 상정해 토의하면 한반도 비핵화와 6자회담은 완전 파탄 나게 된다"며 "보다 강한 조치를 취하게 될 것"이라고 협박했다. 북한이 말하는 '보다 강한 조치'는 추가 핵실험을 염두에 둔 것이라는 관측도 있다. 2006년 핵실험을 했던 북한이 장거리 미사일 발사에 이어 2차 핵실험까지 감행한다면 한반도 상황은 중대 국면에 접어들 수밖에 없다.

북한의 연이은 도발을 막으려면 국제사회가 한목소리로 북한에 대해 한반도 평화와 안전을 위협하는 일체의 행위를 즉각 중단하라고 촉구하고, 북한이 거부할 경우 '상응하는 대가'를 치르게 될 것이라고 경고해야 한다. 이런 국제사회 노력이 성공하려면 무엇보다 중국과 러시아 역할이 중요하다. 중국은 북한의 자제를 요구하면서도 "주권국가의 평화적 우주 이용권을 유엔에서 제재하긴 힘들다"는 입장이라고 한다. 미국 자유아시아방송은 28일 "러시아는 북한이 쏘려는 발사체가 위성이라면 안보리 결의 1718호에 어긋나지 않는다는 결론을 내렸다"고 보도했다.

그러나 북한의 '시험통신 위성' 주장은 근거가 부족하다. 북한은 보통 발사 2년 전 공개하는 통신위성 주파수를 알리지 않고 있고, 위성까지 띄울 만한 통신시장도 없다. 1998년 첫 장거리 미사일 실험 때도 '광명성 1호'가 지구 궤도를 돌고 있다고 주장했지만 실체는 끝내 확인되지 않았다. 결국 북한은 통신위성이라는 가리개를 씌워 장거리 미사일 기술을 과시하려는 것이라고밖에 할 수 없다. 만약에 대만이나 옛 소련 소속 국가들이 북한처럼 '위성 개발'이라며 장거리 미사일을 쏜다면 중국과 러시아가 가만히 보고만 있을 수는 없을 것이다.

북한의 미사일 도발로 한반도 주변 군사적 긴장이 높아지고 미·일 군사태세가 강화되는 것은 중국과 러시아에도 바람직하지 않은 상황이다. 한·미·일도 대북 국제공조의 성공 여부가 중국·러시아의 동참에 달렸다는 인식 아래 외교적 노력을 집중해야 한다. 

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

[사설]아프간 파병과 國益(동아일보, 2009년 3월 30일 27면)

정부가 아프가니스탄 재건과 안정화 작업을 지원하기 위해 군 병력 파견을 검토하고 있다. 글로벌 경제위기와 테러 확산에서 보듯, 지금 세계는 어느 나라도 고립된 채로 살아갈 수 없다. 국제사회에 대한 기여와 역할에 따라 국가 위상이 달라지고 이것이 결국 국익으로 이어진다. 한국은 도움을 받던 나라에서 이제 세계에 도움을 줘야 할 만큼 국력이 커졌다. 국력에 걸맞은 역할을 해야 국제사회에서 책임 있는 일원으로 인정받고 국익과 관련된 영향력도 행사할 수 있다.

…한미동맹 관계도 고려해야 할 중요한 요소다. 국가 간 관계에서 일방적인 시혜는 없다. 우리는 핵과 미사일을 비롯한 대북문제에서 미국과의 공조가 절실하다. 군사적 관계에 국한된 한미동맹을 시대상황에 맞게 21세기 한미전략동맹으로 격상시켜야 하는 과제도 안고 있다. 한미 자유무역협정(FTA) 비준을 위해서도 오바마 정부의 협조가 필요하다.

물론 아프간 파병에는 위험이 따를 수 있다. 과거 아프간에 의료 공병부대를 파견한 이후 우리 장병 1명이 테러로 숨지고 자원봉사에 나섰던 교회 신도 23명이 탈레반 무장단체에 납치돼 2명이 살해된 바 있다. 그래서 국민의 우려가 큰 것이 사실이다. 하지만 긴 안목에서 국익을 위해 필요한 일은 하는 것이 바람직하다. 세계화 시대를 살아가려면 더 넓게 세상을 바라보는 지혜가 필요하다.
===== 특집 =====

美, ‘쇠고기 협정’ 법령 재검토(KBS, 2009년 3월 28일)

<앵커 멘트> 우리가 30개월 이상 미국산 쇠고기를 수입하는 조건으로 제시했던 법령에 대해 미국이 재검토에 들어갔습니다. 현재 우리가 30개월 이상 쇠고기를 수입하지 않아, 당장 상황 변화는 없지만, 이를 폐기할 경우, 상황은 달라질 가능성이 높습니다. 워싱턴에서 이현주 특파원입니다.

<리포트> 주미 대사관은 미국이 다음달 시행될 예정이던 이른바 '강화된 사료 금지 조처'를 재검토 대상 법령에 포함시켰다고 밝혔습니다. 이는 광우병에 걸린 소나 30개월 이상 된 소의 뇌. 척수 등을 모든 동물용 사료로 쓰지 못하도록 하는 내용입니다. 물론 이번 재검토는 전 부시 정부의 추진 법령을 재검토하는 작업의 일환으로 이뤄진 것입니다.

<녹취>최종현(주미 대사관 경제공사) 문제는 이 법령이 30개월 이상 미국산 쇠고기를 우리가 수입하기 위한 전제 조건이라는 겁니다. 물론 현재 우리가 미국과의 추가협상을 통해 30개월 이상 쇠고기 수입을 보류하고 있어 당장 상황 변화는 없습니다. 그러나 미국이 폐기로 결론을 내린다면 문제가 달라집니다. 30개월 이상 미국산 쇠고기 수입을 할 근거가 원천적으로 사라진 셈이기 때문입니다. 이 경우 당초 합의 조건이 해당 법령의 공포였기 때문에 미국이 공포까지 이행했음을 놓고 양국간 법률적 해석의 논란이 제기될 가능성도 있습니다. 더욱 본질적으로는 미국산 쇠고기의 안전성에 대한 국내의 논란이 다시 제기될 수도 있습니다. 그러나 정부측은 이번 조처만 놓고 폐기를 예단할 수 없는 상황이라며 미국의 후속 움직임을 주시하고 있습니다.
워싱턴에서 KBS 뉴스 이현주입니다.

미국의 소리 대북 방송을 위한 교두보 확보(코리아 헤럴드 2009년 3월 30일)
미국 라디오 방송의 대북 방송을 서울에서 북한으로 송출하도록 허용

미국의 소리 방송은 공산주의 정권에 대해서 강경한 자세를 취하고 있는 한국 대통령으로부터의 지지로 금년부터 북한을 향해 서울에서 송신하는 라디오 방송을 확대했습니다.

이명박 정부는 1970년대 이래 처음으로 미국 정부 출자의 방송사에 북한을 향한 라디오방송을 한국에서 송신하도록 하는 특혜를 허락했습니다.

이러한 확대는 오랜 시간 필리핀과 태국, 남태평양의 사이판에서 송출해 온 VOA의 단파방송 프로그램을 더욱 양호한 신호로 들을 수 있게 합니다. 게다가 그것은 AM신호이므로, 방송 청취를 위한 단파 라디오를 필요로 하지 않습니다.

지난 2000년 북한을 탈출해 서울의 단파방송국인 자유북한방송에서 기자로 일하는 김대성씨는“라디오는 사람들을 변화시키는 데 큰 역할을 할 수 있습니다”라고 증언합니다. “비록 그것이 뉴스에 지나지 않지만, 북한 사람들이 지금까지 들어보지 못했던 것임에는 틀림없습니다.” 그러나 이러한 움직임은 벌써 평양에 관한 이 대통령의 어려운 정책과 충돌하고 있는 북한 정부에게 지금까지보다 도발적인 정책 결정으로 간주되고 있고, 다음달 초 로켓을 발사하는 북한의 계획과 함께 한반도의 긴장을 높이고 있습니다. 한국과 일본으로부터의 북핵 협의자들은 북한의 움직임에 대응하기 위해 미국의 고위급 외교관과 금요일 회담을 갖고자 워싱턴으로 날아갔습니다.

서울 근교에 위치한 씽크탱크 ‘세종연구소’의 연구자 백학순은 “북한은 남한 정부가 군사력과 미국의 강경론자들과 결합해 자국의 체제를 넘어뜨리려 한다는 생각을 갖고 있습니다.”라고 말했습니다.

정보의 통제는 북한의 독재 지배를 강화합니다. 라디오는 다른 채널을 듣지 못하고 자국의 리더 김정일에 대한 선전과 칭찬으로 넘치고 있는 정부 신호만을 받도록 하고 있습니다.

그러나 북한의 일부 청취자들은 악명 높은 정치범 수용소의 감금을 포함한 처벌의 위험성에도 불구하고 중국으로부터 몰래 라디오를 반입하거나, 그들이 소유한 라디오의 주파수 고정 장치를 떼어내고 외부 방송을 듣고 있습니다.

1942년 독일어 방송을 시작으로 창립된 VOA는 현재 45개 언어로 방송되고 있습니다. 그들은 냉전시대에 전체주의 국가의 청취자를 대상으로 방송했습니다. 구소련이 몰락한 뒤 그들은 외부 정보와 TV, 라디오 뉴스가 정부에 의해서 통제되는 나라로 방송 대상을 집중했습니다. 1월 1일부터 VOA는 기독교 복음을 전파하는 라디오 매체인 극동방송의 안테나 시설을 사용해 북한을 대상으로 3시간의 심야 방송 중 절반을 송출하고 있습니다. 송신 안테나는 남북한 경계로부터 불과 40마일(65킬로미터) 정도 떨어진 거리에 위치해 있습니다.

해당 지역에서 방송을 모니터하고 있는 라디오 전문가 집단인 동북아방송연구회의 박세경 이사장은 “나는 북한에 보다 좋은 품질의 전파가 전달되고 있을 것이라 생각합니다.”라고 말했습니다.

방송은 주로 뉴스를 내보내고 있는데, 예를 들면 미국을 비롯한 다른 나라와 북한간의 핵 협상 교착 문제에 포커스를 맞추고 있습니다.

한국은 1973년 김대중을 비롯해 주요한 반체제 인사의 납치 사건에 대한 리포트가 중계된 이후부터 VOA 중계를 금지했습니다. 그 당시 납치 사건의 배후에는 권위주의적인 서울의 정부가 있다고 생각하는 견해가 많습니다. 1998년, 민주주의 한국의 대통령이 된 김대중은 북한에 협력과 교류를 요구하는 ‘햇볕정책’의 시대가 도래함을 선언했습니다. 남북관계의 진전으로 그는 노벨 평화상을 받았습니다.

하지만 이명박 대통령은 2008년 2월 취임 이후 북한에 대해 보다 강경한 입장을 보이고 있으며, VOA가 남한에서 다시 방송을 내보낼 수 있도록 하는 조치를 취했습니다.

일부 라디오 전문가는 기독교 선교매체와 VOA간의 계약이 외국의 방송 중계를 금지하는 한국의 법령을 위반했다고 말합니다. 하지만 한국의 방송통신위원회 관계자 김정태씨는 각 방송 네트워크가 그들 방송 시간의 최고 20퍼센트를 외국의 프로그램으로 편성하는 것을 허락하고 있다는 이유로 VOA의 국내 송출을 허가한 그들 기관의 결정을 정당화합니다.

워싱턴 D.C.의 VOA 홍보 디렉터 조안 모어(Joan Mower)는 이 프로젝트를 “VOA가 전세계에서 이뤄지는 몇 천곳의 다른 중계 협정과 같은 일반적 결정”이라고 말했습니다. 그녀는 이메일을 통해 “한국에서 송출되는 VOA 방송은 북한 내에서 청취 가능한 사람들의 범위를 확대하고 있다”고 말했습니다.

국경없는 기자회는 이번주 프랑스에 거점을 두고 있는 미디어 워치독 그룹과 유럽연합이 대략 4억원(29만 달러)의 예산을 자유북한방송을 비롯한 서울 소재 3곳의 민간 대북 라디오국에 지원한다고 발표했습니다. 국경없는 기자회의 빈센트 브로셀씨는 “이러한 라디오는 그 나라 안에서 진정한 변화를 일으킬 수 있는 작은 가능성 중 하나입니다. 라디오가 없는 북한 사람들은 세계에서 어떤 일이 벌어지고 있는지 모릅니다. 그리고 그들은 그들 자신의 나라에서 어떤 일이 벌어지고 있는 것조차 모릅니다.” 라고 말했습니다.

북한은 이들 방송을 “미제에 의한 심리전”으로 규정하고 방해전파를 발사하기도 합니다. 라디오 전문가 박세경씨는 아직까지 VOA의 새로운 AM방송에는 방해를 하지 않았다고 말했습니다. 그는 이러한 배경으로 단파를 방해하는 것에는 방송 신호보다 큰 방해를 위해 많은 기재를 필요로 하는데, 북한이 그렇게 하지 않는 지금의 현실은 북한이 경제적인 곤란을 겪고 있는 것을 나타내는 것으로 보인다고 말했습니다.

박씨는 그가 방송을 지지한다고 말했습니다. “북한 사람들은 정보를 접할 권리가 있습니다”라고 그가 말합니다. “닫힌 나라의 인민들에게 올바른 정보를 제공하는 것은 민주주의 국가가 해야 할 몫입니다.”

(AP 김광태 기자가 이 보도에 기여했다.)
스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09ESOUL502.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 SEOUL 000502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; March 30, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
-------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, JoongAng Ilbo, Dong-a Ilbo, All TVs 
Kim Yu-na Wins First World Championship Title, 
the First Female Skater to Score More Than 200 Points 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
'Student Loan Defaulters' Number 10,000 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Chong Wa Dae Officials Suspected of Receiving Sex Service 
 
Segye Ilbo 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon: 
North Korea Launch Will Go Before U.N. 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
Banks Tighten Mortgage Loan Standards 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
The ROK's Chief Delegate to the Six-Party Talks Wi Sung-lac met with 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
and U.S. and Japanese counterparts Sung Kim and Akitaka Saiki.  Wi 
told reporters that the envoys "discussed how we can deal with the 
rocket issue at the (UN) Security Council." (JoongAng, Seoul, All 
TVs) 
 
An ROK expert say that the UN Security Council might not be able to 
impose sanctions against North Korea after its rocket launch due to 
China and Russia's lukewarm stance. (Hankook, Hankyoreh) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said that North Korea 
probably will launch a missile soon and the U.S. will not shoot it 
down.  Gates says the U.S. believes the North's long-term intent is 
to try to put a nuclear warhead atop a missile but he is skeptical 
that the North has that ability at present.  (Chosun, JoongAng, 
Dong-a, Hankyoreh, Seoul, Segye, All TVs) 
 
The official North Korean newspaper Rodong Shinmun reported on March 
29 that if North Korea's rocket launch is brought to the UN Security 
Council, the North will take "stronger actions."   Experts say that 
North Korea may hint at the possibility of conducting a second 
nuclear test. (Chosun) 
 
An ROK researcher says that the launch date of North Korean rocket 
will depend on weather conditions. (Dong-a)  Considering the weather 
forecast, the launch is expected to take place sometime between 
April 6 and 8. (Hankook) 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Steven Bosworth 
on March 28 indirectly expressed his willingness to meet North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-il. (Dong-a) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-North Korea 
------------ 
 
Most of the ROK media gave prominent play to remarks by the U.S. 
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates that North Korea will probably 
launch a missile soon and the U.S. will not shoot it down.  The ROK 
media reported that Gates said the U.S. believes the North's 
long-term intent is to try to put a nuclear warhead atop a missile 
 
SEOUL 00000502  002 OF 008 
 
 
but he is skeptical that the North has that ability at present. 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo noted that the U.S. stepped back from 
its earlier position to shoot down any rocket from North Korea 
apparently because it could bring negative international 
repercussions and might backfire on the U.S. if it fails.  JoongAng 
Ilbo said that shooting down a rocket flying outside the atmosphere 
could be considered a violation of (established) international 
practices and may invite backlash from the international community. 
The newspaper went on to say that this position by the U.S. also 
stemmed from China and Russia's lukewarm stance toward possible 
sanctions over the North's rocket launch.  JoongAng Ilbo said that 
experts are skeptical about the chance of success of interception. 
If the U.S. fails in an attempt to shoot down a rocket from North 
Korea, this will cause the U.S. to lose face in the international 
community, according to the newspaper. 
 
In a related development, JoongAng Ilbo reported that the ROK's 
Chief Delegate to the Six-Party Talks, Wi Sung-lac, met with U.S. 
Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth and 
U.S. and Japanese counterparts Sung Kim and Akitaka Saiki.  The 
newspaper commented that Wi told reporters that the envoys 
"discussed how we can deal with the rocket issue at the (U.N.) 
Security Council."  Moderate Seoul Shinmun said that the chief 
nuclear envoys from the ROK, the U.S., and Japan discussed bringing 
North Korea's rocket launch to the UN Security Council, saying that 
any rocket launch is in violation of the UN resolution.  The 
newspaper stated, however, that it is unlikely that the UN will take 
strong countermeasures since China and Russia are said to be opposed 
to any further sanctions if it is a satellite launch.   Hankyoreh 
Shinmun echoed this observation that the UN. Security Council might 
find it difficult to devise countermeasures against the North's 
rocket launch due to China and Russia's passive attitude. 
 
Meanwhile, Conservative Chosun Ilbo noted that the official North 
Korean newspaper Rodong Shinmun reported on March 29 that if North 
Korea's rocket launch is brought to the UN Security Council, the 
North will take "stronger actions."  Experts say that North Korea 
may hint at the possibility of conducting a second nuclear test. 
Observers say that the threat from North Korean (to take stronger 
actions if the issue is brought before the UN) shows that North 
Korea intends to push ahead with a rocket launch despite outside 
pressures.  The newspaper went on to say that observers see this as 
a preemptive effort by the North to minimize the possibility of 
strong UN sanctions after its rocket launch.  Others view this 
threat as an indication that North Korea intends to nullify the 
Six-Party Talks and seek practical gains in North Korea-U.S. direct 
talks. 
 
Chosun Ilbo editorialized: The international community should call 
on North Korea to put an end to all kinds of acts jeopardizing peace 
and stability.  Also, it should warn North Korea that it will pay a 
price for what it does.  China and Russia should play an important 
role in this effort to block North Korea's series of provocative 
actions.  North Korea is claiming that the launch is a 'satellite' 
launch, but the launch is apparently a disguise to demonstrate the 
North's long-range missile technology.  North Korea's missile threat 
has intensified tensions on the Korean Peninsula and put the U.S. 
and Japan on a high alert.  Definitely, this will not be beneficial 
for China and Russia.  The ROK, the U.S. and Japan should intensify 
their diplomatic efforts (with China and Russia) to oppose North 
Korea's planned rocket launch with the understanding that the 
participation of China and Russia will determine the success of the 
international community's concerted efforts. 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
SPRINGTIME FOR ASSEMBLY 
(JoongAng Ilbo, March 30, 2009, Page 47) 
 
By Lee Hong-koo, former Prime Minister and adviser to JoongAng Ilbo 
 
Koreans know that a long alliance between Korea and the United 
 
SEOUL 00000502  003 OF 008 
 
 
States will be in our interest. 
 
The National Assembly is a portrait of who we are, as the 
legislators are elected by the people.  So rather than censure the 
crippled operation of the Assembly, politicians and the people 
should explore a new way forward for Korean politics through 
reflection and the sharing of wisdom. 
 
To this end, we should not get locked in a spiritual prison and 
become slaves of the past.  When the occasion demands, we should 
have the courage to remove our deep-rooted obstinacy, grudges, 
regrets, prejudice and convictions. 
 
Among recently democratized nations, the courageous deeds of 
Brazil's President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, who has achieved 
remarkable success, serve as a model for others. 
 
He started as a labor leader and gave up the ideology he had pursued 
for many years, concentrating all his energy on improving people's 
welfare and helping low-income earners.  He has encouraged people to 
take pride in the nation's development and he has created a growth 
engine to bolster the simultaneous development of national politics 
and economy. 
 
The outcome has been splendid.  It was achieved by focusing on the 
question: "With whom can we cooperate to succeed?" rather than 
"Against whom will we fight?" 
 
However, we are still trapped in a historic confrontation, and we 
have not yet found any agreement on resolving the special political 
task of how we can produce a far-reaching agreement with North Korea 
and the United States. 
 
As for the recent shape of Korean politics, we have seen some 
progress thanks to compromise and agreement. 
 
However, the political community has failed to accept the logic of 
recent events and sees this kind of progress as an impediment to the 
nation's development. 
 
The assertion that politics fails to encourage social integration 
but hampers development and contributes to something that could 
break the nation into factions is persuasive. 
 
The people have achieved a considerably high level of consensus 
about the capacity of our political community. 
 
What then is their perception of North Korea and the United States? 
 
Korean society has accumulated a high degree of understanding and 
showed swift adaptation to new situations in terms of the duality of 
the South-North confrontation, which has lasted more than 60 years. 
 
 
The two Koreas have maintained a sharp confrontation about identity 
and the security of their respective regimes.  Nevertheless they 
should cooperate with each other to achieve unification of the 
Korean Peninsula and guarantee the welfare of all 70 million 
Koreans. 
 
Many people understand the duality of the situation facing the two 
Koreas. 
 
The majority of South Koreans accept the following as objective 
facts that have nothing to do with specific ideologies. 
 
One is that the two Koreas are confronted with a huge gap in 
economic growth; and North Korea is vulnerable in terms of freedom, 
human rights and openness as well. 
 
In addition, the North's military and political stance, in 
particular its nuclear and missile development, pose a threat to 
peace and security on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
 
SEOUL 00000502  004 OF 008 
 
 
Some people insist that we should risk waging a war to destroy the 
North Korean regime in order to achieve the kind of reunification 
that fits their vision, while others argue that we should join hands 
with the North's leadership regardless of such basic values as 
freedom, human rights, and anti-dictatorship. 
 
Both of these dangerous extremes should be firmly blocked at this 
point. 
 
The political community has divided the people in their attitudes 
toward the United States into two extremes.  Divisive politics of 
this sort have to be stopped.  The Korean people know that a 
long-term alliance between Korea and the U.S. will be in our 
interest, and not the other way around. 
 
The U.S. is our closest ally, with more than 2 million ethnic 
Koreans living there, expatriates who make a huge contribution to 
Korea's security and economic growth. 
 
Two decades after the Cold War, as the era of the United States as 
the earth's only superpower draws to a close, Korea needs this 
special relationship to be sustained, not allowed to weaken. 
 
Korea-U.S. relations should no longer be used as a tool to divide 
the people, appealing to anachronistic sentiments such as 
superiority or inferiority under the pretext of nationalism. 
 
Such evil practices should be uprooted. 
 
The National Assembly will convene in April.  If politicians decide 
to turn over a new leaf and act more responsibly, the people of this 
country will be impressed, despite all the recent hardships. 
 
I hope that politicians will run the National Assembly in a 
productive manner to win public support and secure the confidence of 
the people. 
 
We have to hear the cry "We can do everything!" and truly believe 
that it is coming from the heart, and that it is not just an empty 
slogan. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
U.S. INITIATIVE OF TRILATERAL TALKS SIGNALS DANGER FOR S. KOREA 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, March 30, 2009, Page 23) 
 
By Executive Editor Jang Jung-soo 
 
On February 19 Morton Abramowitz of the Century Foundation 
contributed an op-ed piece in the International Herald Tribune and 
Japan's Asahi Shimbun titled "U.S., Japan, China must meet 
trilaterally."  (When all is said), the point he seeks to make is 
that the Northeast Asia region is the world's most dynamic, and that 
the United States should work closely with the world's second and 
third greatest economic powers, China and Japan, in order to build 
new American leadership here.  To that end, he says U.S. President 
Barack Obama should invite the leaders of those two countries for a 
trilateral summit. 
 
Abramowitz served as Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence 
and Research during the Reagan Administration, and he accompanied 
Ambassador Stephen Bosworth, U.S. Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy, in a visit to North Korea February 3-7 in the capacity 
of a civilian representative.  He is considered someone with no 
small amount of influence on the Obama Administration's foreign 
policy. 
 
East Asia experts in the U.S., China, and Japan have suggested 
trilateral talks for years now.  Bosworth and his close colleague 
Abramowitz are two among those experts.  Kurt Campbell, a former 
Defense Department official who has been recently asked to become 
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, has 
 
SEOUL 00000502  005 OF 008 
 
 
also openly called for a trilateral summit. 
 
Abramowitz's op-ed piece places the South Korean government in an 
uncomfortable position.  It is assumed that it comes from 
consultation with other members of the U.S. administration. 
 
South Korea's foreign ministry is said to have mobilized various 
diplomatic channels to tell the U.S. and Japan that it thinks the 
type of trilateral summit proposed would be a bad thing.  Given how 
since his inauguration President Lee Myung-bak has spent great 
diplomatic efforts on strengthening the U.S.-South Korean alliance, 
a trilateral summit between the U.S., China, and Japan would by 
itself be taken as an insulting and threatening initiative.  South 
Korea would become a helpless bystander if the U.S., which 
essentially governs the world, and the strongest countries in this 
region, China and Japan, were to join hands and exclude Seoul as 
they discuss the major issues of the Northeast Asian region, 
including their responses to the North Korean nuclear issue and the 
changing situation there. 
 
Key to this proposed initiative is U.S. policy towards China that is 
undergoing transformation within the Obama Administration.  The Bush 
Administration tried to join with Japan, India, and Australia in 
what was a containment policy towards the Chinese.  Now the U.S. is 
trying to embrace China as a strategic partner, establishing common 
control of the Northeast Asian region.  The U.S. is faced with the 
desperate reality that reviving the U.S. economy will be impossible 
without the cooperation of its largest creditors.  It has long 
worked behind the scenes to try to resolve the confrontation between 
China and Japan, something that would pose an obstacle to any 
trilateral framework.  When Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was 
inaugurated three years ago, he broke with convention and did not 
make Washington his first foreign trip.  Instead, he went to China, 
at Washington's recommendation. 
 
Given how China has been disapproving of Seoul's pro-U.S. turn with 
the arrival of the Lee Myung-bak Administration, it is quite 
possible China could place more weight on trilateral talks that 
exclude South Korea than on the Six-Party Talks, a framework that 
has Seoul, Tokyo and Washington working closely together. 
Naturally, South Korea maintains relations with its ally, the U.S., 
and with Japan in order to work out the common concern of North 
Korean nuclear arms.  Neither North nor South Korea find it 
desirable to have issues facing the Korean peninsula, including the 
North Korean nuclear matter, discussed in any real depth by the 
U.S., China, and Japan in trilateral talks that exclude South Korea 
as opposed to having those issues discussed through the Six-Party 
Talks, in which North and South Korea participate.  In preparing for 
a worst case scenario, the fate of the Korean peninsula could be 
decided by dialogue that excludes both.  North and South Korea need 
to act wisely now to restore broken dialogue between them and to 
improve relations in order to respond to fundamental changes in the 
security climate in the region. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
CHINA, RUSSIA MUST COME ON BOARD OVER N. KOREA ROCKET 
(Chosun Ilbo, March 30, 2009, Page 31) 
 
The chief nuclear negotiators of South Korea, the United States and 
Japan met in Washington, D.C. on Saturday and agreed to refer North 
Korea to the UN Security Council should it go ahead with the launch 
of what it claims is a satellite launch vehicle.  South Korea's 
chief nuclear envoy Wi Sung-lac said he views the launch of any 
long-range projectile by North Korea as a violation of UN Security 
Council resolutions. 
 
North Korea's state-run Rodong Shinmun newspaper warned on Sunday 
that the Six-Party nuclear disarmament talks would be over if the 
launch is referred to the Security Council for possible sanctions. 
North Korea also threatened to take "stronger measures."  Some 
believe that could mean additional nuclear tests.  The first test 
 
SEOUL 00000502  006 OF 008 
 
 
was in 2006.  If the North conducts another (nuclear test) after it 
fires a long-range missile, the situation on the Korean peninsula 
would turn very serious. 
 
To prevent more provocations by North Korea, the international 
community must stand united in urging Pyongyang to stop any moves 
that threaten peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in 
warning that a failure to comply would have consequences.  For such 
efforts to succeed, China and Russia are crucial.  China is said to 
be pressing North Korea to stop the missile launch but says it would 
be difficult for the UN to curb the peaceful exploration of space by 
a sovereign country.  Radio Free Asia on Saturday reported that 
Russia has concluded North Korea would not be violating UN Security 
Council Resolution 1718 if the rocket being prepared for launch 
indeed puts a satellite into orbit. 
 
But North Korea's satellite claim has no substance.  It has yet to 
identify the frequency of the communications satellite, which is 
usually revealed two years before launch, and it lacks a large 
enough communications market to warrant such a device.  When North 
Korea test fired its first long-range missile in 1998, it claimed 
the satellite "Kwangmyongsong-1" was then orbiting the earth.  It is 
simply using the satellite as a fig-leaf for its long-range missile 
technology.  If Taiwan or one of the former Soviet-bloc states 
launched a long-range missile, pretending it was a satellite, China 
and Russia would not sit still. 
 
Rising military tensions in Korea and higher military alert levels 
by the U.S. and Japan triggered by North Korea's missile launch 
would not be favorable to China or Russia.  South Korea, the U.S. 
and Japan should focus their diplomatic efforts through a shared 
understanding that international efforts to stop North Korea's 
missile launch depend on the participation of China and Russia. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
TROOP DISPATCH TO AFGHANISTAN AND NATIONAL INTERESTS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, March 30, 2009, Page 27) 
 
The ROKG is considering sending its troops to Afghanistan to support 
the reconstruction and stabilization of Afghanistan.  As shown by 
the global economic crisis and spread of terrorism, no nation can 
survive in isolation.  The status of a nation changes depending on 
the contribution that it makes to the international community and 
the role that it takes on the world stage.  This also affects its 
national interests in the end.  The ROK's national power has grown 
to the extent that the nation now provides help to the world, rather 
than receiving it.  When the ROK plays a role befitting its national 
power, it can be recognized as a responsible member of the 
international community and exercise influence over matters related 
to its national interests. 
 
The ROK-U.S. alliance is also an important factor to be considered. 
In a relationship between countries, there is no such thing as 
one-sided generosity.  We desperately need cooperation with the U.S. 
in the North Korean nuclear and missile issues.  We also have the 
task of elevating the ROK-U.S. alliance from a military relationship 
to a twenty-first century strategic alliance.  Cooperation of the 
Obama Administration is also needed for the ratification of the 
ROK-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA). 
 
Troop dispatch to Afghanistan may, of course, involve some dangers. 
In the past, one ROK soldier was killed in a terrorist attack, and 
23 ROK Christian aid workers were abducted by the Taliban and two of 
them were murdered.  Therefore, it is true that the ROK people are 
very concerned (about the troop deployment).  However, from a 
long-term perspective, we should do what we have to do for the sake 
of our national interests.  In this globalization era, we need the 
wisdom of looking at the world from a broader angle. 
 
 
FEATURES 
 
SEOUL 00000502  007 OF 008 
 
 
-------- 
 
THE U.S. REVIEWS ENHANCED ANIMAL FEED RULE 
(KBS, March 28, 2009) 
 
Anchor: The U.S. has started to review the enhanced animal feed ban 
rule, which we demanded as a condition for U.S. beef imports from 
cattle over 30-months old.  Since we are not currently importing 
beef from cattle older than 30 months, the situation will not change 
immediately, but if the rule is scrapped, it will likely bring 
changes.  Washington Correspondent Lee Hyun-joo has details. 
 
Reporter: The ROK Embassy in Washington said that the U.S. has 
included the "enhanced feed ban," which was initially scheduled to 
be implemented next month, among rules to be reviewed.   Under this 
regulation, brains and spinal cords from BSE-infected cattle or 
cattle over 30 months of age are banned from all animal feed.  Of 
course, this decision came as part of work to reexamine rules pushed 
by the previous Bush Administration. 
 
The problem is that this rule is a precondition for the ROK to 
accept U.S. beef imports from cattle over 30-months old.  Of course, 
since we are currently delaying the import of U.S. beef from cattle 
older than 30 months through additional talks with the U.S., it will 
not change the situation immediately.  However, if the U.S. finally 
decides to abolish (the enhanced feed ban), the story will be 
different because it will basically remove the grounds on which the 
ROK agreed to import U.S. beef from cattle over 30-months old.  In 
this case, considering that the initial condition for the beef 
import agreement between the ROK and the U.S. was the promulgation 
of the enhanced feed ban, controversy could arise over legal 
interpretations of whether the U.S. actually promulgated the ban. 
More fundamentally, it could also spark controversy in the ROK over 
the safety of U.S. beef.  However, the ROKG is watching further 
developments, saying that it is too early to predict that the ban 
will be scrapped. 
 
Lee Hyun-joo from Washington 
 
 
VOA SECURES POWERFUL BASE 
(Korea Herald, March 30, 2009, Page 3) 
 
U.S. radio station allowed to broadcast into N.K. from Seoul 
 
Voice of America has boosted its radio broadcasts into North Korea 
this year by transmitting from Seoul with support from a South 
Korean president who has taken a hard-line stance against the 
reclusive communist regime. 
President Lee Myung-bak's administration is allowing the U.S. 
government-funded broadcaster to use transmission equipment in South 
Korea to send its dispatches into the North for the first time since 
the 1970s. 
That makes the signal much clearer than VOA's long-running shortwave 
broadcasts from far-flung stations in the Philippines, Thailand and 
the South Pacific island of Saipan. Moreover, it's an AM signal, so 
listening in doesn't require a shortwave radio. 
"Radio can play a big role in changing people," said Kim Dae-sung, 
who fled the North in 2000 and is now a reporter at Free North Korea 
Radio, a shortwave radio broadcaster in Seoul. "Even if it's simply 
news, it's something that North Koreans have never heard of." 
Still, the move could be seen as yet more provocative policymaking 
by a government already at loggerheads with the North over Lee's 
tough policy on Pyongyang, and comes at a time of heightened 
regional tensions over North Korea's plans to launch a rocket early 
next month. Nuclear envoys from South Korea and Japan flew to 
Washington for talks Friday with top U.S. diplomats about North 
Korea. 
"North Korea will see this as meaning that the South's government is 
trying to overthrow the regime by uniting strength with U.S. 
hard-liners," said Paik Hak-soon, an analyst at the private Sejong 
Institute think tank outside Seoul. 
Information control buttresses North Korea's autocratic rule. Radios 
in the country come with prefixed channels that receive only 
 
SEOUL 00000502  008 OF 008 
 
 
government signals brimming with propaganda and praise for leader 
Kim Jong Il. 
But some listen to outside broadcasts using radios smuggled in from 
China or by removing the frequency jammers on their state-issued 
radios, despite the risk of harsh punishment, including 
incarceration in North Korea's notoriously grim political prison 
camps. 
VOA, founded in 1942 with a broadcast in German, now has programs in 
45 languages. During the Cold War, it targeted listeners in 
totalitarian states. Since the fall of the Soviet Union, it has 
focused on countries where radio and TV news is 
government-controlled and outside news sources are banned. 
Since Jan. 1, VOA has been using the antenna facilities of the Far 
East Broadcasting Company-Korea, a Christian evangelical radio 
station, for half of its three-hour nighttime broadcast into the 
North. The antenna is only 40 miles (65 kilometers) from the 
border. 
"I think it's getting deeper into the North in better quality," said 
Park Se-kyung, head of the Northeast Asian Broadcasting Institute, 
an association of radio experts monitoring broadcasts in the 
region. 
The broadcast is mainly news, with a focus on North Korea, such as 
its ongoing nuclear standoff with the United States and other 
nations. 
South Korea prohibited VOA from broadcasting from its soil for 
carrying a 1973 report on the kidnapping of Kim Dae-jung, then a 
leading South Korean dissident. The authoritarian Seoul government 
at the time is widely believed to have been behind the abduction. 
Upon becoming president of democratic South Korea in 1998, Kim 
ushered in a "sunshine policy" toward the North that called for 
cooperation and engagement. The warming of relations won him the 
Nobel Peace Prize. 
But President Lee has taken a far tougher line on North Korea since 
taking office in February 2008, a stance that has opened the way for 
VOA to resume transmissions from the South. 
Some radio experts say VOA's arrangement with the Christian station 
violates a South Korean ban on broadcasters relaying foreign 
signals. 
But Kim Jung-tae, an official with the Korea Communications 
Commission, justifies his agency's decision to allow the VOA 
broadcast on the grounds that local networks are allowed to fill up 
to 20 percent of their airtime with foreign programming. 
Joan Mower, VOA's public relations director in Washington, D.C., 
described the project as "a routine arrangement, similar to 
thousands of other arrangements VOA has worldwide." 
Broadcasting via South Korea helps VOA "expand its reach to 
audiences inside North Korea," she said by e-mail. 
Reporters Without Borders announced this week that the France-based 
media watchdog group and the European Union will support three 
Seoul-based radio stations targeting North Korea, including Free 
North Korea Radio, with about 400 million won ($290,000). 
"These radios are one of the few hopes to create a real evolution in 
the country. Without that, the North Koreans don't know what is 
going on in the world and they don't know even what is going on in 
their own country," said Vincent Brossel of Reporters Without 
Borders. 
North Korea condemns such broadcasts as "U.S. psychological warfare" 
and often jams the signals. So far, it has not interfered with VOA's 
new AM broadcast, said radio expert Park. Doing so requires more 
equipment than blocking shortwave signals, and the fact that North 
Korea isn't doing so may indicate the North is struggling 
economically, he said. 
Park said he supports the broadcasts. 
"North Korean people have the right to information," he said. 
"Providing correct information to people in a closed nation is what 
democratic nations should do." 
(Associated Press writer Kwang-tae Kim contributed to this report.) 
 
 
STEPHENS
</file>