^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1905 | 2009-12-03 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 3일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001905

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84591|서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 3일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/05/30 00:07//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
이명박 (노조의 요구에 결코 굴하지 말고) "철도파업 대체인력 늘려라"

중앙일보
아동 성폭행범 형량 '50년'

동아일보
오바마 '아프간 도박'

한국일보, 모든 텔레비전
스톱…철도파업 1주일째 물류대란 본격화

한겨레 신문
헌법보장 단체행동권 부정 CEO대통령 '빗나간 노조관

세계일보
4대광역권 미래 성장축 육성

서울신문
세종시 '미묘한 변화'

===== 국내 동향 =====

유명환 외교부 장관은 11월 2일 동북아미래포럼에서 북한이 한국 전쟁을 종식한 정전협정을 대체하기 위해 미국하고만 평화협정 논의를 추진하겠다는 것을 수용하지 않겠다고 말했다. (중앙)

한국 정부와 집권당 한나라당은 2일 내년 7월부터 320명의 한국군 병력을 아프가니스탄에 보내기로 하고 파병 기간을 2년 6개월로 정했다. (중앙일보, 동아, 한국, 세계, 서울)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

오바마가 12월 2일 연설에서 몇 달 안에 아프가니스탄에 3만 병력을 추가 파병하고 2011년 7월 안에 미군 병력이 아프가니스탄에서 철수한다고 발표했다. (전체)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 오바마의 아프가니스탄 문제 연설 ====

한국 언론의 이목을 사로잡은 것은 아프가니스탄에 관한 오바마 대통령의 연설이었다. 한국 언론은 대게 오바마의 결정에 따라 몇 달 안에 아프가니스탄에 3만 병력을 추가 파병하고 2011년 7월 안에 미군 병력의 철군이 시작된다는 직설적인 보도를 전했다.

주목을 받은 [[https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/091201-obama-afghanistan-speech-korean.pdf|오바마 대통령의 성명]] 부분: "저는 이 주장(아프가니스탄은 또다른 베트남)은 역사를 잘못 읽은 데에서 기인한다고 믿습니다. 왜냐하면 베트남과는 달리 우리는 우리의 행위의 합법성을 인지하는 43개국의 광범위한 연대가 함께 참여하고 있습니다."… "그들이 그들의 안보를 위해 책임을 져야 하고 미국은 아프가니스탄에서 끝없는 전쟁을 하는 것에 아무런 이해관계를 가지고 있지 않다는 점을 분명히 해야 합니다."

신문은 다음과 같은 제목의 기사를 실었다: <오바마 ‘아프간 도박’; 차기대선 1년반 前 속전속결 매듭… 연임 연계 노린듯> (보수 동아일보); <미국, 2011년 7월부터 아프간 철군> (중도 한국일보, 좌파 성향 한겨레신문, 보수 세계일보, 중도 서울신문)

동아일보 사설: "탈레반과 알카에다 잔존세력을 그대로 놓아두고 철군하는 것은 세계 평화와 미국의 안전을 위태롭게 한다. 그런 의미에서 오바마의 미군 증파는 당연한 선택이다. … 오바마 대통령은 지난달 방한 때 일부 주한미군이 아프간에 재배치될 가능성을 시사했다. 주한미군이 아프간에 차출돼 안보 공백이 발생하는 사태를 차단하기 위해서라도 한국의 아프간 지원은 중요하다."

(편집자 주석: 오바마 대통령은 오산 기지 장병을 상대로 한 연설에서 장병 개개인의 희생과 봉사에 감사를 전하며 "여러분 중 상당 수가 이라크에서 복무했습니다. …여러분 중에는 아프가니스탄에서 복무한 장병들도 있습니다. …여러분 중에는 현지에 다시 파병되는 장병들도 있을 것입니다(출처: 백악관)."라고 말했다. 주한미군의 한반도 철수에 관한 언급은 전혀 없다.)

한국일보 사설: "아프간 주둔 미군을 10만 명으로 늘리는 추가 파병은 위험한 승부수로 평가된다. 탈레반 세력 확대를 막지 못하면 전쟁 명분을 잃는다. 그러나 여론은 추가 파병에 반대다. 이에 따라 철군 일정을 함께 제시했으나, 1년 반 사이에 정세 역전이 가능할지 회의적인 전망이 우세하다. …추가 파병은 '부시의 전쟁'을 '오바마의 전쟁'으로 바꾸었을 뿐이라는 지적이다."

좌파 성향 경향신문의 사설 주장: "우리는 도리어 미국의 대규모 추가 파병이 ‘아프간 수렁’에 더욱 깊이 빠져드는 결과를 초래할 것으로 우려한다. …미국이 9·11 테러 직후 개전해 8년 동안 얻은 것은 사실상 아무것도 없다. …아프간 민주화나 전쟁 승리, 응징 무엇 하나 못 이룬 채 엄청난 희생만 낳았다. …오바마는 아프간 전쟁이 국제 문제라며 나토 등 우방에 더 많은 기여를 요청했지만 이 또한 여의치 않다. …이 ‘오바마의 전쟁’은 미국의 ‘외로운 전쟁’이 될 공산이 커졌다."

==== 북한 ====

중도 우파 중앙일보는 12월 2일 서울에서 열린 포럼에서 [[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3558039|유명환 외교부 장관이 한 발언]]을 전했다. 그는 북한이 한국 전쟁을 종식한 정전협정을 대체하기 위해 미국하고만 평화협정 논의를 추진하겠다는 것을 수용하지 않겠다고 말했다. 추가 인용된 그의 발언: “남북한이 주가 되고 미·중이 참석하는 별도의 포럼에서 논의해야 한다. …북한이 평화협정을 얘기하는 것은 시간을 벌며 이슈를 다른 곳으로 돌리고 계속 핵무기를 개발하기 위한 것이다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설] 오바마의 아프간 추가파병 승부수**(한국일보, 2009년 12월 3일, 39면)

오바마 미 대통령이 어제 아프가니스탄 정세 안정을 위한 추가 파병 계획을 발표했다. …아프간 주둔 미군을 10만 명으로 늘리는 추가 파병은 위험한 승부수로 평가된다. 탈레반 세력 확대를 막지 못하면 전쟁 명분을 잃는다. 그러나 여론은 추가 파병에 반대다. 이에 따라 철군 일정을 함께 제시했으나, 1년 반 사이에 정세 역전이 가능할지 회의적인 전망이 우세하다.

오바마는 대국민 연설에서 전쟁 목표를 탈레반 집권 저지로 낮췄다. 새 아프간 전략은 증강되는 미군과 나토 동맹군으로 인구밀집 지역을 확보하고 온건 토착세력과 타협을 꾀하는 것으로 풀이된다. 그러나 역사적 경험에 비춰, 외세의 아프간 장악은 아주 어렵다. 추가 파병은' 부시의 전쟁'을 '오바마의 전쟁'으로 바꾸었을 뿐이라는 지적이다.

파병을 준비하고 있는 우리 정부와 군은 미국의 새 아프간 전략에 따른 전쟁 양상과 정세 변화를 잘 가늠해야 할 것이다.

**[사설]아프간을 테러 세력에 넘겨줄 순 없다**(동아일보, 2009년 12월 3일, 39면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령은 그제 “아프가니스탄에 3만 명의 미군을 증파하고 2011년 7월 철군을 시작하겠다”고 밝혔다. 오바마는 아프간전쟁을 승리로 이끌겠다는 결연한 의지를 국민에게 직접 전하기 위해 취임 후 첫 대(對)국민 연설을 통해 이 같은 내용을 발표했다. 철군 시점을 자신의 임기가 끝나는 2013년 1월보다 훨씬 앞당겨 잡는 배수진까지 쳤다.

아프간전쟁은 2001년 9·11테러를 자행한 알카에다와 보호세력인 탈레반을 응징하기 위해 미군이 그해 10월 7일 아프간을 공습하면서 시작됐다. 탈레반과 알카에다 잔존세력을 그대로 놓아두고 철군하는 것은 세계 평화와 미국의 안전을 위태롭게 한다. 그런 의미에서 오바마의 미군 증파는 당연한 선택이다. 3만 명이 증파되면 아프간 주둔 미군은 9만8000명으로 늘어난다.

오바마는 하미드 카르자이 아프간 대통령을 겨냥해서는 “백지수표를 주는 시절은 끝났다”고 강조했다. 무능하고 부패에 물든 아프간 정부에 퍼주기식 지원을 하지 않겠다고 경고한 것이다. 아프간에 평화를 정착시키기 위해서는 먼저 카르자이 정권을 바로 서게 해야 한다.

미군 증파 결정에도 불구하고 아프간 상황은 녹록하지 않다. 탈레반은 전면 공격을 포기하고 게릴라전으로 전환해 미군을 비롯한 외국군을 괴롭히고 있다. 수도인 카불은 지난달 대통령특사로 갔던 한국 국회의원들이 호텔에 묵지 못할 정도로 위험하다. 아프간 국민은 오랜 전쟁에 지쳐 있다. 탈레반과의 싸움에서 이기기 위해서는 탈레반용 군사작전과 민간용 재건작전이 모두 동원돼야 한다. 전투병 파견과 아프간의 재건, 자위병력 양성을 위한 지원이 동시에 필요하다.

우리가 파견하기로 한 지방재건팀(PRT)도 기여할 분야가 많다. 한국이 계획하고 있는 경찰 훈련이야말로 아프간의 홀로서기를 위해 절실하게 필요한 지원이다. 3만 명의 추가 병력 파병은 미국에도 만만치 않은 부담이다. 오바마 대통령은 지난달 방한 때 일부 주한미군이 아프간에 재배치될 가능성을 시사했다. 주한미군이 아프간에 차출돼 안보 공백이 발생하는 사태를 차단하기 위해서라도 한국의 아프간 지원은 중요하다. (편집자 주석: 오바마 대통령은 오산 기지 장병을 상대로 한 연설에서 장병 개개인의 희생과 봉사에 감사를 전하며 "여러분 중 상당 수가 이라크에서 복무했습니다. …여러분 중에는 아프가니스탄에서 복무한 장병들도 있습니다. …여러분 중에는 현지에 다시 파병되는 장병들도 있을 것입니다(출처: 백악관)."라고 말했다. 주한미군의 한반도 철수에 관한 언급은 전혀 없다.)

**<사설>아프간 전쟁 수렁에 더욱 깊이 빠져드는 미국**(경향신문, 12월 3일 31면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 엊그제 취임 후 첫 대 국민 연설을 통해 내년 상반기까지 아프가니스탄에 미군 3만명을 추가 파병하겠다고 밝혔다. 지난 9월 매크리스털 아프간 주둔군 사령관이 추가 파병을 요청하는 보고서를 제출한 뒤 장고를 거듭한 끝에 내린 결단이다. 오바마 대통령은 여전한 추가 파병 반대 국내여론을 의식한 듯 18개월이 지나면 미군 철수가 시작될 것이라고 구체적인 철군 일정까지 밝혔다. 아프간이 제2의 베트남이 될 것이란 우려를 잠재우려는 의도다.

그러나 그것은 오바마와 미국의 희망사항이라고 할 만큼 전망은 지극히 불투명하다. 우리는 도리어 미국의 대규모 추가 파병이 ‘아프간 수렁’에 더욱 깊이 빠져드는 결과를 초래할 것으로 우려한다. 여기엔 분명한 근거들이 있다. 두 개의 질문을 던져볼 필요가 있다. 미국은 이 전쟁에서 무엇을 얻었나, 그리고 무엇을 위한 증파인가.

미국이 9·11 테러 직후 개전해 8년 동안 얻은 것은 사실상 아무것도 없다. 빈 라덴은 건재하며 탈레반도 패주는커녕 더욱 강해졌다. 그럼 아프간이 민주화됐나. 전혀 아니며 미국은 부패한 카르자이 대통령을 돕고 있는 꼴이다. 그 사이 희생자만 양산돼 미군 929명 등 연합군에서만 사망자가 1532명 나왔다. 탈레반은 2만3000여명, 민간인은 1만1000~3만1000여명으로 추산된다. 아프간 민주화나 전쟁 승리, 응징 무엇 하나 못 이룬 채 엄청난 희생만 낳았다. 그런데도 오바마는 9·11 테러 희생자들을 다시 상기시키며 전세를 역전시키고 안보책임을 아프간에 이양하기 위한 증강임을 강조했다. 그러나 이런 일이 실현될 가능성은 무망해 보인다. 소련은 아프간 10년 전쟁에서 패퇴한 뒤 무너졌다.

오바마는 아프간 전쟁이 국제 문제라며 나토 등 우방에 더 많은 기여를 요청했지만 이 또한 여의치 않다. 프랑스는 이미 거부 의사를 분명히 했고 독일도 난색을 표시했다. 9·11 발생 직후 르몽드지가 ‘우리는 모두 미국인이다’라고 언명했던 당시와는 세계여론이 판이하게 달라졌다. 이 ‘오바마의 전쟁’은 미국의 ‘외로운 전쟁’이 될 공산이 커졌다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1905.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001905 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 3, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
President Lee Instructs Officials Not to Yield to Rail Strikers' 
Demands and to Increase Alternative Workers 
Capable of Running Trains 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Child Sex Offenders May Face Up to 50 Years in Prison 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Obama's "Afghan Gamble" 
 
Hankook Ilbo, All TVs 
Damage Mounts as Railway Strike Continues 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
President Lee's "Deviant View" of Labor Unions; He Denies Labor 
Unions' Right to Collective Action Guaranteed 
by Constitution 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Fair Trade Commission Fines Six LPG Providers 
668.9 Billion Won for Price-Fixing, 
the Largest Fine Ever Imposed Domestically 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
"Delicate Change" on Sejong City; Prime Minister Says, 
"We are Open to All Possibilities" 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan, in a Dec. 2 forum, said that Seoul 
will not accept the peace treaty that North Korea is seeking solely 
with the U.S. to replace the armistice that ended the Korean War. 
(JoongAng) 
 
The ROKG and the ruling Grand National Party (GNP) agreed yesterday 
to seek to send around 320 Korean troops to Afghanistan next July 
for a two-and-a-half-year mission. (JoongAng, Dong-a, Hankook, 
Segye, Seoul) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
President Barack Obama, in a Dec. 1 major speech, announced that he 
would send an additional 30,000 troops to Afghanistan in coming 
months and start bringing American forces home in July 2011. (All) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-President Obama's speech on Afghanistan 
----------------------------------------- 
President Obama's speech on Afghanistan continued to capture the 
attention of the ROK media.  The media offered mostly 
straightforward reporting on President Obama's decision to send an 
additional 30,000 troops to Afghanistan in coming months and to 
start bringing American forces home in July 2011. 
 
Coverage highlighted the President's statements: "I believe this 
argument (Afghanistan is another Vietnam) depends on a false reading 
of history.  Unlike Vietnam, we are joined by a broad coalition of 
43 nations that recognizes the legitimacy of our action;" and "It 
must be clear that Afghans will have to take responsibility for 
their security, and that America has no interest in fighting an 
endless war in Afghanistan." 
 
SEOUL 00001905  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
Newspapers carried the following headlines: "Obama's Gamble: 
'Concluding Unpopular War in 18 Months'" (conservative Chosun Ilbo); 
"Obama's 'Afghan Gamble;' Obama Intends to End War One and a Half 
Years before Next Presidential Election... He Seems Aiming to Use 
Afghan Achievement for His Reelection" (conservative Dong-a Ilbo); 
and "Obama Plans Afghan Pullout in July 2011" (moderate Hankook 
Ilbo, left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun, conservative Segye Ilbo, 
moderate Seoul Shinmun) 
 
Dong-a Ilbo editorialized: "Troop pullout without mopping up Taliban 
and al-Qaida remnants would endanger world peace and U.S. security. 
In that sense, it is natural that President Obama has decided to 
send additional troops to Afghanistan. ...  During last month's 
visit to Seoul, President Obama hinted at the possibility that some 
USFK troops may be redeployed to Afghanistan.  In order to prevent 
this from happening, creating a security vacuum, it is important for 
the ROK to provide assistance to Afghanistan." 
 
(Ed. Note:  In his Remarks to the Troops at Osan Air Base, Korea on 
November 19, 2009, the President thanked the troops for their 
individual personal sacrifices and service and said: "Many of you 
served in Iraq.  ... Others among you served in Afghanistan.  ... 
Others among you will deploy yet again. "   (Source: 
Whitehouse.gov.)  There was no reference about pulling USFK troops 
off the Korean peninsula.) 
 
Hankook Ilbo editorialized: "The deployment of additional troops, 
which will bring the total number of U.S. troops in Afghanistan to 
over 100,000, can be seen as a dangerous gambit.  If (this move) 
does not prevent the Taliban's expansion of power, the U.S. will 
lose justification for the war.  However, the (U.S.) public is 
opposed to the troop increase.  President Obama laid out a timeline 
for a troop pullout, but it is doubtful that the tide of war will 
turn in favor of the U.S. and its allies in just one and a half 
years.  ...   Observers say that the additional troop deployment has 
just turned 'Bush's war' into 'Obama's war.'" 
 
An editorial in left-leaning Kyunghyang Shinmun argued: "We worry 
that this U.S. troop increase will result in the U.S. sinking deeper 
into the 'Afghan quagmire.'  ...  The U.S. has achieved little for 
eight years since it started the war shortly after the 9/11 terror 
attacks.  ...   The war has only inflicted huge losses without 
achieving Afghanistan's democratization or punishing (the Taliban.) 
...  President Obama also requested additional contributions from 
U.S. allies, including NATO countries, saying that the Afghan war is 
an international issue.  However, this will not be easy.  The 
'Obama's war' is highly likely to become the U.S.'s lonely war." 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo quoted Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan 
as saying in a Dec. 2 forum in Seoul that the ROKG will not accept 
the peace treaty that North Korea is seeking solely with the U.S. to 
replace the armistice that ended the Korean War.  He was further 
quoted: "Our basic position is that any discussion on a peace deal 
must be centered on the two Koreas, with the U.S. and China also 
involved. ... North Korea talking about a peace deal seems intended 
to buy time and divert attention while it continues to develop 
nuclear weapons." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
OBAMA TAKES GAMBLE WITH AFGHAN STRATEGY 
(Hankook Ilbo, December 3, 2009, Page 39) 
 
U.S. President Obama announced a plan to send additional troops to 
Afghanistan to stabilize the situation there.  The deployment of 
additional troops, which will bring the total number of U.S. troops 
in Afghanistan to over 100,000, can be seen as a dangerous gambit. 
If (this move) does not prevent the Taliban's expansion of power, 
the U.S. will lose justification for the war.  However, the (U.S.) 
 
SEOUL 00001905  003 OF 004 
 
 
public is opposed to the troop increase.  President Obama laid out a 
timeline for a troop pullout, but it is doubtful that the tide of 
the war will turn in favor of the U.S. and its allies in just one 
and a half years. 
 
In his speech, President Obama said, "We must reverse the Taliban's 
momentum and deny it the ability to overthrow the government." 
Obama noted that his new Afghan strategy is to secure key population 
centers and partner with Afghan security forces.  However, if 
history is any guide, it will be very hard for foreign forces to 
gain control of Afghanistan.  Observers say that the additional 
troop deployment has just turned "Bush's war" into "Obama's war." 
 
The ROKG, which is ready to dispatch its troops to Afghanistan, 
should look closely at the developments of the war and any changes 
in the situation (in Afghanistan) that may occur due to the U.S.'s 
new Afghan strategy. 
 
 
WE CANNOT HAND AFGHANISTAN OVER TO TERRORISTS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, December 3, 2009, Page 39) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama said on December 1 that he had decided 
to "send an additional 30,000 U.S. troops to Afghanistan" and to 
"begin the transfer of our forces out of Afghanistan in July of 
2011."  In order to directly deliver his strong determination to win 
the war in Afghanistan to the people, President Obama announced the 
decision at his first address to the nation since his inauguration. 
He even "had his retreat cut off" by advancing a timeline for the 
troop pullout to a date much earlier than January of 2013, when his 
term in office expires. 
 
The war in Afghanistan started when the U.S. military launched an 
air attack against Afghanistan on October 7, 2001, to punish 
al-Qaida and the Taliban, which protects al-Qaida, for the September 
11 terrorist attacks.  A U.S. troop pullout without mopping up 
Taliban and al-Qaida remnants would endanger world peace and U.S. 
security.  In that sense, it is natural that President Obama has 
decided to send additional troops to Afghanistan. 
 
To Afghan President Hamid Karzai, President Obama stressed, "The 
days of providing a blank check are over."  He warned that the U.S. 
will stop providing largesse to an inefficient and corrupt Afghan 
government.  In order to establish peace in the war-torn country, 
the Karzai Administration must first shape up. 
 
Despite Washington's additional troop dispatch decision, the 
situation in Afghanistan is not getting better.  The Taliban gave up 
an all-out attack and is harassing the U.S. and allied forces with 
guerilla warfare.  The capital Kabul is so dangerous that, when ROK 
lawmakers visited the city as Presidential envoys last month, they 
were not able to stay at a hotel there.  The Afghan people are tired 
of the prolonged war.  In order to win a victory over the Taliban, 
both military operations against the militant group and civilian 
reconstruction operations should be mobilized.   It is necessary to 
send combat troops at the same time that assistance in the 
reconstruction of Afghanistan and training of local self-defense 
forces  is provided. 
 
There are many areas in which our Provincial Reconstruction Team 
(PRT) can make contributions.  In particular, the ROK's plan to 
train local police is desperately needed to ensure that Afghanistan 
stands on its own feet.  The deployment of additional 30,000 troops 
is a heavy burden for the U.S.  During last month's visit to Seoul, 
President Obama hinted at the possibility that some USFK troops may 
be redeployed to Afghanistan.  In order to prevent this from 
happening, creating a security vacuum, it is important for the ROK 
to provide assistance to Afghanistan.  (Ed. Note:  In his Remarks to 
the Troops at Osan Air Base, Korea on November 19, 2009, the 
President thanked the troops for their individual personal 
sacrifices and service and said: "Many of you served in Iraq.  ... 
Others among you served in Afghanistan.  ...  Others among you will 
deploy yet again. "   (Source: whitehouse.gov.)  There was no 
reference about pulling USFK troops off the Korean peninsula.) 
 
SEOUL 00001905  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
U.S. SINKING DEEPER INTO AFGHAN QUAGMIRE 
(Kyunghyang Shinmun, December 3, Page 31) 
 
In his first speech to the U.S. public on his plan for Afghanistan 
on December 1, President Obama announced that the U.S. will send an 
additional 30,000 troops to Afghanistan.  The USG had been deeply 
considering whether to dispatch additional troops after Afghanistan 
Commander General Stanley McChrystal submitted a report requesting 
additional troop deployment in September.  Still mindful that a 
considerable number of Americans are opposed to the U.S.'s increased 
military presence, Obama set a specific timeline, saying "After 18 
months, our troops will begin to come home."  It seems that he wants 
to quell concerns that Afghanistan may become a second Vietnam. 
 
However, the prospects (that the troops will return on time) are 
very dim since it is unlikely that this timeline can be easily 
realized as President Obama and the U.S. public hope.  We worry that 
this U.S. troop increase will result in the U.S. sinking deeper into 
the 'Afghan quagmire.'  There are clear reasons that justify this 
concern.  We need to ask two questions.  What has the U.S. gained 
from this war?  Why has the U.S. decided to increase its troop 
levels in Afghanistan? 
 
The U.S. has achieved little for eight years since it started the 
war shortly after the 9/11 terror attacks.  Osama Bin Laden is still 
alive.  The Taliban was not routed from power but has strengthened 
its hold.  Has Afghanistan achieved democracy?  The answer is no. 
It seems that the U.S. is providing support to corrupt President 
Karzai.  Over the duration of the war so far, the war has cost 1,532 
lives of allies including 929 U.S. soldiers.  The war has only 
inflicted huge losses without achieving Afghanistan's 
democratization or punishing (the Taliban.)  Obama reminded us of 
the victims of the 9/11 terror attacks, stressing that the U.S. 
should reverse the tide of the war and that additional troop 
deployment is aimed at transferring responsibility to the Afghans. 
However, there is a slim chance that this will be realized.  The 
Soviet Union collapsed after it lost the 10-year Afghan war. 
 
President Obama also requested additional contributions from U.S. 
allies, including NATO countries, saying that the Afghan war is an 
international issue.  However, this will not be easy.  France made 
it clear that it will not increase its troop levels and Germany has 
expressed reluctance to dispatch additional troops.  Immediately 
after the 9/11 terror attacks, people in the world proclaimed, "We 
are all Americans," but now their attitude has changed drastically. 
'Obama's war' is highly likely to become the U.S.'s lonely war. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>