^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1818 | 2009-11-17 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 17일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001818

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84190|서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 17일]]
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/05/07 05:37//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
北,탈북자 돕던 조선족 등 200여명 납치

중앙일보
현대기아차·LG도 세종시 간다

동아일보
4대강 사업, 민주당 지도부는 강력반대하는데…"즉각중단"은 42%

한국일보
국내외 100여곳과 세종시 유치 협의

한겨레 신문
국정원, 인터넷 '패킷 감청' 장비 31대 보유

세계일보
정부 '세종시 입주·녹색사업' 일방 추진 기업들 뿔났다

서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
정 총리 "경제허브·과학메카로"

===== 국내 동향 =====

청와대 핵심 관계자는 아직도 논의 중인 한미 FTA와 관련해 19일 서울에서 열리는 한미 정상회담에서 "좀 더 구체적으로 (진전된) 내용이 나오기를 기대한다"고 16일 말했다. (조선, 한겨레)

미국의 국내 자동차 시장 추가 개방 요구 움직임과 관련해 정부가 최근 미국의 추가 요구사항을 주한 미국대사관을 통해 문의한 결과 미국의 답변은 기존 FTA안과 큰 차이 없었다고 지식경제부 관계자는 전했다. (동아)

김태영 국방부 장관은 국회 답변에서 노무현 정부 당시 이뤄졌던 한국군의 아프가니스탄 철군에 대해 “부끄러운 일이라고 생각한다”고 17일 말했다. (중앙)

한편, 제1야당 민주당은 16일 한국 정부의 아프가니스탄 재파병 결정에 반대하기로 결정했다. (중앙, 한국, 한겨레)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 오바마 대통령의 아시아 순방 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 오바마 대통령이 중국 대학생들과 상하이에서 모임을 가졌다는 소식을 전하며 인권, 티베트, 중국과 대만 간 양안 관계 등 민감한 문제는 회피했다고 보도했다. 인용된 오바마 대통령의 발언: “양국이 최근 30년간 많은 도전과 좌절이 있었고, 서로 의견 대립이 없지 않았지만 그렇다고 적수는 아니다.”

보수 동아일보는 특히 오바마 대통령의 발언 가운데 “정보의 자유로운 유통은 사회를 훨씬 강하게 한다. 미국은 인터넷 접근을 제한하지 않으며 그것은 국력의 근원”이라는 부분을 언급하면서 인터넷 검열이 수시로 이뤄지는 중국 당국을 간접적으로 겨냥했다고 풀이했다.

보수 조선일보와 좌파 성향 한겨레 신문은 오바마 대통령의 서울 방문과 관련해 한국 정부는 11월 19일 한미 정상회담에서 한미 FTA의 진전을 기대하고 있다는 청와대 핵심 관계자의 발언을 전했다.

보수 동아일보는 사설에서 이렇게 밝혔다: "북한은 비핵화의 중요한 조치는 뒤로 미루는(back-loading) 행태를 보여 왔는바 합의가 있더라도 북한이 비핵화 전에 원점으로 회귀하는 경향이 있으므로 비핵화와 관련해 중요한 조치를 먼저 취하도록(front-loading) 해야 한다는 점을 강조할 필요가 있다. …중국이 동아시아 지역협력의 중심국으로 약진하고 동아시아공동체 논의가 진전되는 상황 속에서 한미 FTA는 미국이 아시아태평양 국가와 맺은 최초의 FTA로서 아시아에서 미국의 전략적 입지 강화에 도움이 될 수 있다. …비준 지연 시 미국은 중국에 비해 역내 역할이 약화되고, 아시아에서의 중요한 교두보를 마련할 기회를 상실할 가능성을 우려해야 한다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[한승주 칼럼]오바마 대통령 방한의 과제**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 17일, 38면; 발췌)

한승주 고려대 명예교수·전 외무부 장관

北비핵화 연기 전략 공동대응을

동북아의 세 번째이자 마지막 방문국인 한국과의 정상회담에서는 북한과의 양자협상에 대한 양해와 지지를 구할 것이다. 또한 이명박 대통령의 ‘그랜드 바겐’에 대한 구체적 취지와 방안을 청취하고 이런 포괄적 방안에 대한 지지를 표명할 것이다. 이를 토대로 앞으로 북한과의 협상(양자 및 다자)에서 한미 및 한미일의 공조 방안과 로드맵을 구상할 것으로 예상된다.

한국의 입장에서는 북핵 문제와 관련한 미-북 양자 대화가 북한의 비핵화 의지를 확인하고 북한을 6자회담에 복귀시키는 방법이라는 미국의 판단에 동의할 수 있다. 그러나 북한은 비핵화의 중요한 조치는 뒤로 미루는(back-loading) 행태를 보여 왔는바 합의가 있더라도 북한이 비핵화 전에 원점으로 회귀하는 경향이 있으므로 비핵화와 관련해 중요한 조치를 먼저 취하도록(front-loading) 해야 한다는 점을 강조할 필요가 있다.

둘째, 오바마 대통령의 방한은 한미동맹의 현주소를 확인하고 미래 비전에 대한 양국 간의 확고한 신뢰를 부각시키는 기회가 될 것이다. 지난 정부 시절 한미동맹이 미일동맹에 비해 더 많은 불화를 겪었다면 지금은 하토야마 유키오 내각의 출범에 따른 미일 간의 불협화음으로 미국의 입장에서 한미동맹이 더욱 큰 중요성을 갖게 됐다.

전시작전통제권 전환과 관련해 2012년 시한에 대한 양국의 공약은 이미 천명됐으나 시한에 이르는 동안 정기적으로 매년 점검한다는 합의를 넘어 전환에 영향을 미칠 여건, 즉 북핵 상황, 북한의 대미·대한 정책 등 몇 가지의 점검도 필요함을 강조해야 한다. 1970년대 후반 지미 카터 대통령의 철군 결정이 일부 시행 후 보류됐고 1990년 초 동아시아전략구상(EASI)에 따른 감축이 북핵 문제 발생으로 1단계 이후 중지된 선례를 참고할 필요가 있다. 북한이 추가 도발 시 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM) 개발에 성공할 경우 한반도의 평화체제 구축 시까지 전시작전권 전환과 한미연합사 해체의 시기를 재고하는 방안을 고려할 수 있다.

셋째, 한미 정상은 양국 FTA의 전략적 함의를 강조할 필요가 있다. 중국이 동아시아 지역협력의 중심국으로 약진하고 동아시아공동체 논의가 진전되는 상황 속에서 한미 FTA는 미국이 아시아태평양 국가와 맺은 최초의 FTA로서 아시아에서 미국의 전략적 입지 강화에 도움이 될 수 있다. FTA 비준은 의회가 하지만 행정부(대통령)의 적극적 개입이 결정적 역할을 한다. 오바마 대통령은 한미 FTA가 미국에 경제적 전략적으로 얼마나 이익이 될지, 비준이 안 되는 경우 어떤 불이익이 될지 분명히 인식할 필요가 있다. 비준 지연 시 미국은 중국에 비해 역내 역할이 약화되고, 아시아에서의 중요한 교두보를 마련할 기회를 상실할 가능성을 우려해야 한다.

**[특파원 칼럼] 오바마가 서울에서 할 일**(조선일보, 2009년 11월 17일, 38면)

이하원 워싱턴 특파원

… 18일 저녁 서울에 도착하는 버락 오바마 미 대통령의 방한 일정은 간단하다. 이명박 대통령과의 정상회담, 주한미군 기지 방문이 사실상 전부다. 8일간 아시아 순방의 맨 마지막에 한국 방문이 배치된 것은 물론, 오바마 대통령의 체류시간은 24시간이 채 되지 않는다.

올 초 힐러리 클린턴 미 국무장관의 이화여대 강연 같은 행사도 잡혀 있지 않다. 14일 일본 도쿄와 16일 중국 상하이에서 각각 공개 강연을 했던 것과도 비교가 된다.

한국을 처음 방문하는 오바마 대통령의 짧은 일정이 한국에 대한 홀대라고 여길 필요는 없다. 오바마 대통령은 4월 런던의 G20 회의와 6월 이명박 대통령의 워싱턴 DC 방문 당시 정상회담을 통해 신뢰 있는 관계를 만들었다고 보고 있다. 특히 6월 정상회담에서 발표된 '한미동맹 공동비전'은 양국 관계를 한 단계 격상시킨 것이었다.

하지만 '새로운 세계 질서'를 강조하는 오바마 대통령이 한국을 더 체험할 기회가 없는 것은 아쉽다. 오바마 대통령은 여러 차례 한국에 대한 관심을 표명했지만, 그것은 대부분 간접 경험에서 나온 것이었다.

바쁜 일정 속에서도 오바마 대통령이 적어도 두 가지는 꼭 체험하거나 행동으로 보여줬으면 하는 바람이 있다. 무엇보다 한국의 자동차 시장이 폐쇄적이라고 생각하는 오바마 대통령이 서울의 도로에서 외국산 자동차들이 질주하는 모습을 눈여겨봤으면 좋겠다. 호텔 주차장을 채우고 있는 외국 자동차에 관심을 가져 보는 것도 좋다. 시간이 허락하면 서울 곳곳에 산재해 있는 일본·유럽 자동차 판매장을 찾아가 보라고 권하고 싶다. 한국인들을 직접 만나 구매하고 싶어하는 외국 자동차에 대한 육성을 직접 들어보길 바란다.

오바마 대통령을 비롯한 미국의 정·관계 지도자들은 여전히 한미 자동차 무역 불균형에 '보이지 않는 손'이 작동한다고 보고 있다. 지난 5일 론 커크 미 무역대표부(USTR) 대표는 상공회의소 연설에서 한미 FTA의 자동차 문제를 언급하면서 '폐쇄적인 한국시장의 유산'이라는 표현을 쓰기도 했다. 오바마 대통령이 '성능 좋고, 합리적인 가격의 외국 자동차'에 열려 있는 한국 자동차시장을 유심히 보고 간다면, 한미 FTA의 돌파구를 찾을 수 있을 것이다.

오바마 대통령이 용산 미군기지에서 헬기를 타면 불과 30분 만에 휴전선 비무장지대(DMZ)에 위치한 판문점에 내릴 수 있다. …바로 그곳에서 로널드 레이건 전 미국 대통령이 1987년 베를린 장벽 앞에서 한 것처럼 역사적인 연설을 할 수는 없을까.

휴전선 대신 중국 국경을 넘어 한국에 정착한 탈북자를 직접 만나보는 것도 적지 않은 의미가 있다. 그들을 만나보면 미국이 70년대 난민을 대량으로 수용한 '인도차이나 모델'을 탈북자에게 적용하자는 폴 울포위츠 전 세계은행 총재의 제안을 되새길 수 있을 것이다.

얼마 전 한국을 방문한 알란 가르시아 페루 대통령은 한국에 반해서 하루를 더 체류했다. 누구보다 바쁜 미국 대통령이 그렇게까지 할 수는 없겠지만, 전용기를 잠시 세워놓고 한미관계에 몇 시간을 더 투자할 수는 있지 않을까.

**[강병태 칼럼] 오바마의 대북 경고와 제안** (한국일보, 11월 17일 38면: 발췌)

강병태 논설위원실장

오바마 미 대통령이 "북한의 위협에 개의치 않고(We will not be cowed by threats), 행동으로 분명한 메시지를 보낼 것"이라고 말했다. 발언의 앞뒤는 이런 내용이다."북한의 핵 개발 등 대결노선에 맞서 유엔 안보리 결의 등 제재를 강화해 왔다…. 국제적 의무를 거부하면 북한의 안보는 오히려 더 불안해질 것이다".

아시아를 순방중인 오바마는 일본 도쿄 산토리 홀에서 아시아정책 기조를 소상하게 밝힌 연설을 했다. 북한관련 대목도 구체적이다. 북미 대치와 대화의 향방을 가늠하는 데 유용하다. 특히 우리사회가 대북정책을 둘러싼 '남남 갈등'으로 치닫는 것을 막는 데 도움될 듯하다.

…오바마는 대북 경고에 이어"북한에게는 다른 길이 있다"고 덧붙였다. 6자 회담에 복귀해 비핵화 약속을 이행하면, 고립과 궁핍 대신 무역 투자 관광 등 경제적 기회와 안보가 보장되는 밝은 미래가 있다고 강조했다. 경고와 제안, 어느 한 쪽에 치우치지 않도록 배려한 느낌이다. …

그러나 오바마 정부의 대북정책 기조부터 정확히 살피는 게 순서가 아닐까 싶다.

지난 달, 미 콜럼비아대 동아시아 연구소와 미-한 연구소는 <미국의 대북전략>이라는 정책 보고서를 내놓았다. 클린턴 행정부에서 갈루치 대북협상대표의 수석보좌관 등을 지낸 조엘 위트가 대표 집필했다. 보고서가 오바마 정부의 대북정책에 얼마나 반영됐는지는 알 수 없으나, 더러 혼란스러운 행보를 이해하는 데 참고할 만한 내용이 많다.

보고서는 효과적 대북 전략에는 단호한 조치와 진지한 대화의 양면 전략이 필요하다고 전제한다. 북한의 핵무장이 안보 불안에서 비롯됐고 대미 불신이 깊기 때문에 협상을 통한 조기 비핵화는 어렵다. 따라서 핵보유국 지위를 인정하지 않을 것을 분명히 인식시키면서, 목표를 낮게 잡아 서서히 신뢰를 쌓을 것을 권고하고 있다. 부시 행정부가 집권 2기 들어 비핵화 협상을 서두르다 실패한 교훈을 유념해야 한다는 것이다.

이 보고서는 중국의 지원 확대에 힘입은 북한이 경제적 유인에 호응할 가능성도 과거보다 낮다고 본다. 따라서 외교접촉 수준을 점차 높이는 등 북한이 가장 바라는 주권 존중자세를 보이는 것이 유용하다. 탐색적 대화로 신뢰를 구축하면서 경제개발 지원 등을 폭 넓게 논의하라는 권고다. 방대한 진단과 처방을 압축하면, 압박과 대화를 병행하되 서두르지 말라는 것이다.

미국의 공식 행보와 물밑 움직임은 다를 것이다. 핵과 북한 문제에 미국과 우리의 이해가 같을 수도 없다. 그러나 북한 핵에 대처하는 효과적 전략은 논하지 않은 채 정부 비판에 매달리는 것은 어색하다. …

===== 특집 =====

**＂韓·美 정상회담서 FTA 진전 기대;청와대 ＂구체내용 협상중＂**(조선일보, 2009년 11월 17일, 6면)

주용중 기자

청와대 핵심 관계자는 19일 서울에서 열리는 이명박 대통령과 버락 오바마 미국 대통령 간 정상회담의 중요 의제인 한미 FTA와 관련해 "좀 더 구체적으로 (진전된) 내용이 나오기를 기대한다"고 16일 말했다. 이 관계자는 이번 정상회담에 대한 브리핑을 통해 "오바마 대통령이 지난 14일 도쿄에서 '한미 FTA의 진전을 위해 필요한 노력을 하겠다'고 말한 만큼 미측의 의지가 있다고 보고 그 같은 기대를 하고 있다"면서…이와 관련해 김종훈 통상교섭본부장과 론 커크 미국 무역대표부(USTR) 대표는 지난 주말 APEC(아시아태평양 경제협력체) 정상회의가 열린 싱가포르에서 만나 한미 FTA를 진전시키는 방안을 집중 논의한 것으로 전해졌다.

청와대 관계자는 이 같은 사실을 확인하면서 "우리가 (FTA와 관련해) 어느 정도 (수준을) 원한다는 것은 미국측에 전달했다"면서 "구체적인 내용은 미국과 아직 협상 중이어서 밝힐 수는 없다"고 했다. 이 관계자는 "한미 정부가 FTA에 서명한 지 2년이 지난 만큼 빠른 시일 내에 발효가 되어야 한다는 것이 우리 입장"이라며 "오바마 대통령이 기자회견 때 어떻게 얘기할지 지켜봐야 한다"고 했다.

정부의 다른 관계자는 "우리측은 오바마 대통령이 이번 정상회담에서 한미 FTA의 '조속한' 발효 필요성에 대해 성의 있는 화답(和答)을 해주기를 바라고 있다"고 했다. 청와대 관계자는 이번 한미 정상회담 의제로 FTA 이외에 북핵문제, G20 정상회의 공조, 기후변화 대책, 한미동맹 미래비전 후속조치 등 5가지를 꼽았다.

(이 기사는 조선일보가 제공한 번역이다. 우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 일부 영어 문장을 추가하였다.)

**정부, 車시장 개방관련 추가 요구사항 美대사관에 문의 “美 답변서, 기존 FTA案과 큰 차이 없어”**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 17일, 6면)

한상준, 장강명 기자

미국의 국내 자동차 시장 추가 개방 요구 움직임과 관련해 정부가 최근 미국의 추가 요구사항을 주한 미국대사관을 통해 문의한 사실이 뒤늦게 밝혀졌다.

지식경제부 관계자는 16일 “한미 자유무역협정(FTA)이 체결됐음에도 불구하고 미국 정치권 등에서 국내 자동차 시장 추가 개방을 요구하는 목소리가 높아져 구체적인 요구사항을 대사관 측에 문의했다”며 “주한 미국대사관을 통해 미국 측 요구사항을 서면으로 열람했지만 기존의 한미 FTA 양허안 내용과 큰 차이가 없었다”고 밝혔다.

지경부의 문의에 미국대사관이 답변 형식으로 제시한 자료에는 △승용차 관세는 발효 즉시 철폐 △현재 배기량별로 5단계로 되어 있는 자동차세를 3단계로 단순화 등 기존 한미 FTA 양허안 내용 외에 별다른 요구사항은 없었다고 이 관계자는 전했다.

이에 앞서 론 커크 미국 무역대표부 대표, 미국 상하원 의원 등은 국내 자동차 시장 개방과 관련해 최근 “한국 자동차 시장의 문호를 더 개방해야 한다” “한미 FTA를 수정해야 한다” 등의 발언을 잇달아 쏟아낸 바 있다. 이에 대해 지경부 측은 “미국에서 추가 개방과 관련한 목소리가 커지는 만큼, 우리 측의 대응을 위해서라도 관련 사실을 파악해 볼 필요가 있어 문의한 것”이라며 “하지만 미국대사관의 답변을 봐도 뚜렷한 추가 요구 조건이 없어 자국 내 정치적 사정에 의한 움직임으로 보고 있다”고 덧붙였다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1818.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001818 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 17, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
N. Korea Kidnaps 200 Korean Chinese Helping N. Korean Defectors over 
Past 10 Years 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group, LG Mull New Plant and Research Center 
in Sejong City 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Survey: Only 42 Percent of Opposition Democratic Party Lawmakers 
Polled Demand "Immediate Halt" to ROKG's Four-River Restoration 
Project 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
ROKG in Talks with 100 Domestic and Foreign Firms 
for Investments in Sejong City 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
National Intelligence Service Allegedly Has 31 Pieces of Equipment 
for"Packet Eavesdropping," which Involves 
Detailed Monitoring of Internet Activity 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Discontent Grows among Companies over ROKG's Unilateral Push for 
Sejong City and "Green Project" 
 
Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
Panel Starts Sejong City Review 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
A key Blue House official said yesterday that (Seoul) expects to 
move the KORUS FTA forward during the Nov. 19 ROK-U.S. summit in 
Seoul, adding that concrete measures are still under discussion with 
the U.S. (Chosun, Hankyoreh) 
 
According to a Ministry of Knowledge Economy official, the ROKG 
recently asked the U.S. Embassy in Seoul about additional U.S. 
demands for the further opening of the ROK automobile market, but 
the U.S. reply did not differ greatly from the existing KORUS FTA. 
(Dong-a) 
 
Defense Minister Kim Tae-young told the National Assembly yesterday 
that it is a shame that the previous Roh Moo-hyun Administration 
withdrew ROK troops from Afghanistan. (JoongAng) 
 
The main opposition Democratic Party, meanwhile, decided yesterday 
to oppose the ROKG's decision to redeploy troops to Afghanistan. 
(JoongAng, Hankook, Hankyoreh) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-President Obama's Asia Trip 
---------------------------- 
Most ROK media covered President Barack Obama's Nov. 16 meeting in 
Shanghai with Chinese college students, reporting that both 
President Obama and the students sidestepped sensitive issues, 
including human rights, Tibet and cross-strait ties between China 
and Taiwan.  President Obama was quoted as saying: "The two nations 
have faced lots of challenges and frustrations.  They also had some 
conflicts of opinion.  But that does not mean that they are 
rivals." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo, in particular, noted President Obama's 
remarks, "I believe unrestricted Internet access is a very 
 
SEOUL 00001818  002 OF 006 
 
 
significant issue.  I think that the more freely information flows, 
the stronger the society becomes. ...  Unrestricted Internet access 
is a source of strength," and interpreted them as indirect criticism 
of the Chinese government for frequently censoring the Internet. 
 
Regarding President Obama's upcoming visit to Seoul, conservative 
Chosun Ilbo and left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun quoted a key Blue 
House official as saying yesterday that (Seoul) expects to move the 
KORUS FTA forward during the Nov. 19 ROK-U.S. summit in Seoul. 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo carried an op-ed that said: "Since North 
Korea tends to 'back-load' important denuclearization steps and to 
return to the starting point in defiance of an agreement, (Seoul) 
needs to emphasize the importance of getting the North to 
'frond-load' significant denuclearization steps during President 
Obama's visit to Seoul. ...  In a situation where China is emerging 
as the hub of regional cooperation in East Asia and discussions are 
making progress on an East Asia community, the KORUS FTA, which is 
the first free trade deal between the U.S. and an Asia-Pacific 
country, will boost America's strategic position in Asia.  ... 
There is a possibility that the delayed U.S. ratification of the 
KORUS FTA may weaken America's influence in the region, leading to 
the U.S. losing an opportunity to secure an important bridgehead in 
the region." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
TASKS DURING PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO SEOUL 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 17, 2009, Page 38; Excerpts) 
 
By Han Seung-joo, Korea University Professor and Former Foreign 
Minister 
 
Joint Response Needed Against North Korea's Strategy to Delay 
Denuclearization 
 
During President Obama's summit with the ROK, his last stop on a 
whirlwind tour of Northeast Asia, he is expected to seek 
understanding and support of U.S.-North Korea bilateral dialogue. 
He will also listen to the purpose and details of President Lee 
Myung-bak's "grand bargain" proposal and express his support for the 
comprehensive plan.  Based on this, the two leaders are expected to 
devise a road map for future bilateral and multilateral negotiations 
with the North and cooperation plans between the ROK and the U.S. 
and between the ROK, the U.S., and Japan in addressing the North 
Korean issue. 
 
The ROK agrees with the U.S. judgment that U.S.-North Korea 
bilateral dialogue is a way to confirm North Korea's commitment to 
denuclearize and bring the North back to the Six-Party Talks. 
However, since North Korea tends to 'back-load' important 
denuclearization steps and to return to the starting point in 
defiance of an agreement, (Seoul) needs to emphasize the importance 
of getting the North to 'frond-load' significant denuclearization 
steps during President Obama's visit to Seoul. 
 
Second, President Obama's visit to Seoul will serve as an 
opportunity to reaffirm the ROK-U.S. alliance and spotlight strong 
mutual trust in their future visions.  Under the previous 
administration, the ROK-U.S. alliance suffered more troubles than 
the U.S.-Japan alliance did.  However, after the launch of the 
Hatoyama Administration, the U.S. and Japan are undergoing some 
discord, consequently giving more weight to the ROK-U.S. alliance. 
 
 
Regarding the transfer of the wartime operational control, the ROK 
and the U.S. already set the deadline of 2012, but they should 
stress a need to go beyond the agreement to check regularly if the 
OPCON transfer would be appropriate in 2012 and examine the 
conditions that could affect the OPCON transfer, such as the 
situation in the North and North Korea's policy toward the U.S.  We 
should note that in the late 1970s, then-President Jimmy Carter's 
 
SEOUL 00001818  003 OF 006 
 
 
decision to pull U.S. troops out of the Korean Peninsula was put on 
hold after being partially implemented, and in early 1990, 
Washington halted the troop withdrawal process, which was carried 
out in accordance with the East Asia Strategic Initiative (EASI), 
due to the eruption of the North Korean nuclear issue.  If the North 
succeeds in developing an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) 
in its additional provocations, the two nations can reconsider the 
timing for the OPCON transfer and the dissolution of the ROK-U.S. 
Combined Forces Command until a peace regime is established on the 
Korean Peninsula. 
 
Third, leaders from the U.S. and the ROK need to stress strategic 
implications of the KORUS FTA.  In a situation where China is 
emerging as the hub of regional cooperation in East Asia and 
discussions are making progress on an East Asia community, the KORUS 
FTA, which is the first free trade deal between the U.S. and an 
Asia-Pacific country, will boost America's strategic position in 
Asia.  Even though lawmakers are the ones that ratify the free trade 
pact, the (Obama) Administration should actively intervene to play a 
decisive role (in the ratification.)  The Obama Administration 
should realize what advantages the KORUS FTA will bring to the U.S. 
economically and strategically and what disadvantages a failed 
ratification will produce.  There is a possibility that the delayed 
U.S. ratification of the KORUS FTA may weaken America's influence in 
the region, leading to the U.S. losing an opportunity to secure an 
important bridgehead in the region. 
 
 
THINGS OBAMA SHOULD DO IN SEOUL 
(Chosun Ilbo, November 17, 2009, Page 38) 
 
By Washington Correspondent Lee Ha-won 
 
The Seoul itinerary of U.S. President Barack Obama, who arrives 
Wednesday evening, is simple.  A summit with President Lee Myung-bak 
and a visit to the U.S. Forces Korea base are pretty much all there 
is.  The last leg of his eight-day Asia tour, his stay in Seoul will 
barely last 24 hours. 
 
There will be no event like the Ewha Womans University lecture 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton gave earlier this year, and 
nothing like the town hall meetings Obama held in Tokyo on Saturday 
and in Shanghai on Monday. 
 
But that need not be seen as a sign of neglect.  Obama feels that a 
relationship of trust has already been established in meetings with 
Lee during the G20 conference in London in April and Lee's visit to 
Washington in June.  The "vision" for the Korea-U.S. alliance based 
on shared beliefs and trust in free democracy and the market 
economy, announced at the June summit, already strengthened the 
bilateral relationship. 
 
But it is a pity that Obama, who is so aware of the changing world 
order, will not have a chance to see more of Korea.  He has 
expressed interest in the country on many occasions, but most of it 
was from indirect experience. 
 
Hopefully, even his busy itinerary will allow him to see two things 
in Korea.  First, since he thinks the Korean automobile market is 
closed, let him watch the foreign cars that throng the streets of 
Seoul, the car parks of hotels, and the European car dealerships 
scattered around Seoul.  Perhaps he will, have a chance to meet some 
Koreans in person and listen to their views about the foreign cars 
they want to buy. 
 
American political leaders including Obama still feel that an 
"invisible hand" is at work in the auto trade imbalance between the 
two countries.  U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk, in a Chamber of 
Commerce address on Nov. 5, used the phrase "legacy of Korea's 
long-closed market," in referring to the issue in the Korea-U.S. 
Free Trade Agreement.  If Obama observes the Korean car market, 
which is quite open to efficient and affordable foreign cars, he may 
be able to find a breakthrough in getting the FTA ratified. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001818  004 OF 006 
 
 
And if he takes a helicopter at the USFK base in Yongsan, he could 
be at the truce village of Panmunjom in the demilitarized zone 
within half an hour.  Could he not deliver a historic speech, much 
as former president Ronald Reagan did in front of the Berlin Wall in 
1987? 
 
Or instead, a meeting with North Korean refugees who have settled 
down in the South would also be significant.  If he met them, he 
would be able to recall former World Bank president Paul Wolfowitz's 
suggestion that the "Indochinese model" that accommodated a host of 
refugees in the 1970s be applied to North Korean refugees. 
 
Peruvian President Alan Garcia, who visited Korea last week, was so 
charmed by the country that he stayed one more day.  Though the 
American president, who is busier than anyone else, won't be able to 
do so, perhaps he could let his private airplane stand by for a few 
more hours to invest as much time as he can afford in Korea-U.S. 
relations. 
 
 
OBAMA'S WARNING AND PROPOSAL OVER N. KOREA 
(Hankook Ilbo, November 17, page 38: Excerpts) 
 
By Chief Editorial Writer Kang Byung-tae 
 
In a speech during his visit to Japan, U.S. President Obama said, 
"We will not be cowed by threats."  He added, "North Korea has 
chosen a path of confrontation and provocation.  We have tightened 
sanctions on Pyongyang.  We have passed the most sweeping UN 
Security Council resolution.  North Korea's refusal to meet its 
international obligations will lead only to less security - not 
more." 
 
President Obama delivered a speech outlining the U.S.'s Asia policy 
at Suntory Hall in Tokyo.  His specific remarks on North Korea may 
indicate whether U.S. relations with North Korea will veer away from 
confrontation and move toward dialogue. 
 
President Obama also said, "There is another path that can be taken. 
The U.S. is prepared to offer North Korea a different future. 
Instead of an isolation that has compounded the horrific repression 
of its own people, North Korea could have a future of international 
integration.  Instead of gripping poverty, it could have a future of 
economic opportunity - where trade, investment and tourism can offer 
the North Korean people the chance at abetter life.  And instead of 
increasing insecurity, it could have a future of greater security 
and respect."  It seems that President Obama tried to take a 
balanced approach to the North Korean issue by using an appropriate 
measure of warnings and proposals. 
 
We should examine the Obama Administration's North Korea policy 
first. 
 
Last month, the East Asian Institute at Columbia University and the 
U.S.-Korea Institute released a report, "The U.S.'s North Korea 
Policy."  The report was authored by Joel Wit who served as Senior 
Advisor to Ambassador Robert L. Galluci during the Clinton 
Administration.  It is uncertain to what extent the Obama 
Administration's North Korea policy reflects the report.  But the 
report may shed light on why the Obama Administration has sometimes 
made confusing moves. 
 
The report assumes that an effective North Korea policy requires a 
two-track strategy of strict measures and serious dialogue.  North 
Korea harbors a deep distrust of the U.S. while pursuing nuclear 
development due to concerns about the security of its regime. 
Therefore, negotiations with North Korea will not lead to the 
country giving up its nuclear ambitions soon.  In addition, the 
report recommends that the U.S. should make sure that it will not 
recognize North Korea as a nuclear state and should gradually build 
trust with North Korea.  The report notes that the Obama 
Administration should learn the lessons from the Bush 
Administration, which, in his second term, rushed to talk with the 
North on denuclearization but failed. 
 
SEOUL 00001818  005 OF 006 
 
 
 
The report observes that North Korea is less likely to respond to 
economic incentives than before due to increased aid from China. 
Therefore, it may be better for the U.S. to take action to respect 
the sovereignty of North Korea, which the country covets dearly, by 
elevating the level of diplomatic contact gradually.  The report 
says that the U.S. should establish trust through dialogue with the 
North while engaging in extensive discussions on important issues 
including economic aid.  In short, according to the report, the U.S. 
should push for both pressure and dialogue without making haste. 
 
The U.S.'s official moves are likely to be different from its 
behind-the-scenes moves.  The U.S. and the ROK do not have the same 
interests in the North Korean issue.  We should not just criticize 
the ROKG without discussing effective ways to deal with the North 
Korean nuclear issue. 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
SEOUL HAS HOPES FOR FTA FROM KOREA-U.S. SUMMIT 
(Chosun Ilbo, November 17, 2009, Page 6) 
 
By Reporter Joo Young-joong 
 
A key Cheong Wa Dae official on Sunday said he expects more concrete 
progress on the Korea-U.S. FTA from the meeting between President 
Lee Myung-bak and his U.S. counterpart Barack Obama in Seoul on 
Thursday.  The official said at a November 16 briefing about the 
upcoming ROK-U.S. summit, "Since President Obama said in Tokyo on 
November 14that 'He will try to move forward the FTA,' we think that 
the U.S. is committed (to the FTA), and therefore, we have such 
expectations."  Trade Minister Kim Jong-hoon and U.S. Trade 
Representative Ron Kirk met last weekend at the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation Summit in Singapore and discussed how to take 
the epically delayed FTA forward. 
 
"We delivered our expectations about the FTA to the U.S. side," the 
official said.  "The details can't be revealed at this point because 
we're still in negotiation with the U.S., but since two years have 
passed from the time both governments signed the FTA, our position 
is that it should come into effect soon," adding, "We should watch 
what President Obama is going to say during his press conference." 
 
 
Another official said Seoul hopes for a "sincere" response from 
Obama to calls for quick implementation of the FTA.  The five major 
issues on the agenda for this summit, the official said, are the 
FTA, North Korea's nuclear program, cooperation on the G20 Summit, 
ways to tackle climate change, and developing the alliance. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper.  We have compared 
the English version on the website with the Korean version and added 
some sentences in English to make them identical.) 
 
 
ROKG OFFICIAL: "ADDITIONAL U.S. DEMANDS FOR AUTO MARKET OPENING DO 
NOT DIFFER GREATLY FROM EXISTING KORUS FTA" 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 17, 2009, Page 6) 
 
By Reporters Han Sang-joon and Chang Kang-myung 
 
It has been learned that the ROKG recently inquired about additional 
U.S. demands for the further opening of the ROK auto market through 
the U.S. Embassy in Seoul. 
 
A Ministry of Knowledge Economy official said on November 16, 
"Although the ROK-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) has already been 
signed, there is a growing voice in U.S. political circles for the 
further opening of the ROK auto market, and therefore, we asked the 
U.S. Embassy in Seoul about the U.S.'s specific demands," adding, 
"We read additional U.S. demands in a letter from the Embassy, but 
they were not greatly different from the ROK-U.S. FTA." 
 
SEOUL 00001818  006 OF 006 
 
 
 
The official said that the letter did not contain new demands in 
addition to the FTA provisions that (the ROK's) auto tariffs should 
be eliminated right after the FTA goes into effect and that the 
(ROK's) current five-tier tax based on engine displacement should be 
simplified into a three-tier system. 
 
Previous to the Ministry's inquiry, U.S. Trade Representative Ron 
Kirk and members of the House and Senate recently issued a series of 
statements on the opening of the ROK's auto market, such as "The ROK 
should further open up its auto market" and "The ROK-U.S. FTA should 
be revised."  In this regard, the Ministry of Knowledge Economy 
said, "Since there is a growing voice in the U.S. for the further 
opening up of the ROK market, we made an inquiry in order to find 
the facts and prepare countermeasures," adding, "Since the Embassy's 
reply did not contain any clear demands, however, we think that the 
atmosphere in Washington is affected by a political situation within 
the U.S." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>