^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1697  |  2009-10-26  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 26일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001697

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 26일
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/19 18:34//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 한겨레신문, 모든 텔레비전
신종 플루 급속 확산;한국, 하루 3000명 美, 비상사태 선포 

중앙일보
바그다드 도심 최악 폭탄테러

동아일보
[탈북 468명 집단입국,그 후 5년] (1-2)끝나지 않은 유랑-맘 편히 살 곳 어디에

한국일보, 서울신문
이명박 대통령 "北 의도 불투명·核 포기 징후 없어"

세계일보
北·美 양자접촉 ‘기싸움' 시작됐다

===== 국내 동향 =====

이명박 대통령은 “아직 북한의 의도가 불투명하며 핵을 포기하겠다는 결단을 내렸다는 징후도 보이지 않고 있다”고 25일 동아시아 정상회의(EAS) 업무 오찬에서 말했다. (전체)

이동관 대통령홍보수석비서관은 24일 남북 정상회담 추진과 관련해 “이면협상이나 이면계약은 없을 것”이라고 말했다. (전체)

마이클 멀린 미국 합참의장은 앞으로 몇 년 안에 주한 미군의 일부 병력을 중동으로 파견하는 것을 검토하고 있다고 최근 방한 중에 말했다.

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

리근 북한 외무성 미국국장이 24일(현지 시각) 뉴욕에서 6자 회담의 미국 측 수석대표인 성 김 북핵특사와 만났다. (전체)

미국 재무부는 23일(현지 시각) 탄도미사일 수출거래에 관여했다는 이유로 북한 은행을(압록강개발은행)을 대량살상무기(WMD) 확산자로 지정했다. (동아, 세계, 서울)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

리근 북한 외무성 미국국장과 6자회담 미국 측 수석대표가 함께한 10월 24일 회동이 오늘 언론에 대대적으로 보도되었다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 이번 회동을 "거론되는 시나리오는 이미 북한의 초청을 받은 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표가 평양 또는 제3국에서 강석주 외무성 제1부상과 협의하는 것이다. …평양에 갈 경우엔 김정일 국방위원장을 직접 만나 버락 오바마 대통령의 친서를 전달할 수도 있다."

중앙일보가 사설에서 주장한 내용: "북한의 의도는 갈수록 강화되는 국제사회의 대북 제재를 완화하고 한·미·일을 중심으로 한 대북 공조체제를 교란하려는 데 초점이 있는 것으로 판단된다. …한·미·일 3국은 북한의 2차 핵실험을 계기로 핵 문제 해결을 위해 ‘압박과 대화’의 투 트랙 접근법을 실행 중이다. 우리는 북한이 핵 포기를 돌이킬 수 없는 상황으로 진전시킬 때까지 이 방식을 계속 고수해야 한다고 믿는다. …북한의 평화공세에 휘말려 성급하게 제재를 푸는 일은 피해야 한다."

25일 동아시아 정상회의(EAS) 업무 오찬 중에 나온 이명박 대통령의 발언이 크게 회자되고 있다. “아직 북한의 의도가 불투명하며 핵을 포기하겠다는 결단을 내렸다는 징후도 보이지 않고 있다.”

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://www.seoul.co.kr/news/newsView.php?id=20091026030006|[열린세상] 미국산 쇠고기 감상]]**(서울신문, 2009년 10월 26일, 30면)

이준한 인천대 정치외교학과 교수

“청사 구내식당에서 미국산 쇠고기를 사용하지 않는 이유가 뭐냐?” 며칠 전 광화문 정부중앙청사에서 신임 국무총리가 국가정책조정회의 말미에 불쑥 던진 말이란다. 그 뒤 벌어진 국정감사에서는 그 실마리가 쏟아졌다. 그간 미국산 쇠고기 창자 등이 해동검사나 조직검사 없이 육안으로만 검역되었다. 미국산 쇠고기는 선택권도, 힘도 없는 전경이나 의경에게 돌아갔다. 이보다 더욱 놀라운 것은 미국산 쇠고기가 대한민국의 이름을 세계에 떨치는 국가대표선수들의 태릉선수촌에서 대량 소비되었다는 사실이다.

현재 연구원으로 미국에 거주하는 필자도 주말에 시장을 볼 때마다 맛있게 포장된 쇠고기를 보고 군침만 흘리다 돌아서곤 한다. 가난한 유학생 시절에는 주머니 사정 때문에 그랬는데 지금은 아는 게 병이라고 예전처럼 마음껏 못 사먹는 것이다. 한국에 수입되는 미국산 쇠고기는 30개월 또는 그 이상에 뼈까지 포함될 수 있지만 미국에 유통되는 쇠고기는 거의 모두 20개월 미만이라 안심할 수 있는 것이라고 최면을 걸어도 마음이 쉽게 바뀌지 않는다.

이달 초 끔찍한 기사를 본 뒤 미국산 쇠고기에 대한 불안감은 더욱 커졌다. 뉴욕타임스 기사에 따르면 현재 22세로 젊고 건강한 미국 여성 하나가 햄버거를 먹은 뒤 바로 설사와 발작을 일으켰다. 곧이어 그녀는 9주 동안이나 혼수상태에 빠졌다. 그녀의 어머니가 다진 고기를 사서 집에서 손수 구워 만든 햄버거 고기는 이콜라이균에 오염된 것이고 그녀는 신경계통 손상으로 인한 하반신 마비로 더 이상 걷지 못한다. 그 기사를 읽기 바로 며칠 전 맛나게 하나 사먹었던 맥도널드사의 햄버거 때문에 아연 내 하반신도 쭈뼛해졌다.

햄버거의 다진 고기에는 질 좋은 쇠고기만 쓰이는 게 아니라는 의심을 받는다. 내장이나 다른 부위도 종종 들어가고 뼈도 때때로 포함되기도 한다. 간혹 쇠고기 아닌 다른 종류의 고기도 포함되고 미국 외 다른 나라의 고기도 섞인단다. 그래서 갈아서 다진 고기가 아닌가.

미국에서 쇠고기와 관련하여 올 10월에만 해도 최소한 3건의 리콜조치가 이루어졌단다. 비단 다진 고기가 아닌 다른 종류 또는 다른 부위의 쇠고기도 대상이다. 이콜라이균의 오염 가능성이나 특정위험부위 또는 특정위험물질의 미제거 등이 리콜의 배경이다. 한데 10월에 리콜조치가 이루어진 미국의 한 쇠고기회사는 한국으로 쇠고기를 수출하는 작업장이기도 하다. 이래저래 미국산 쇠고기는 국내외 소비자의 불안감을 키운다.

한국에서 미국산 쇠고기 수입은 2008년 10월까지 증가했다가 그 즈음 불어 닥친 세계적 경제위기로 인해 한국 경제가 악화되고 환율도 높아지면서 줄기 시작했다. 여기에 미국산 쇠고기에 대한 소비자의 신뢰감이 약한 탓도 있을 것이다. 미국산 쇠고기 수입문제와 관련하여 PD수첩과 여배우를 소송한 한 수입업체 사장은 촛불집회로 인해 업계가 무려 4000억원 이 넘는 어마어마한 손해를 입었다고 주장한다. 이러한 상황이라면 미국의 축산업계도 한국에서 목표로 생각했던 것만큼 시장도 못 넓히고 이윤도 못 남긴 게 분명하다.

일본에서는 지난 10일 수입금지부위인 등뼈가 조금 섞였다고 미국의 해당 공장에 20개월 미만으로 한정된 쇠고기마저 수입을 전면 금지시켰다. 하토야마 정부는 미국의 요구대로 쇠고기 수입조건을 완화할 재협상 계획이 전혀 없다고 못을 박았다. 타이완에서도 한국의 미국산 쇠고기 수입조건만큼 완화시켰다는 협상소식은 없다. 이른바 촛불시위가 한창일 때 일본이나 타이완의 미국산 쇠고기 협상을 보면서 추후 대처하겠다는 정부 지도자는 지금 뭐하고 있는가. 국무총리는 구내식당 수준이 아니라 보다 근본적인 해결책을 찾아 나설 때가 아닌가. 소비자가 안심하고 “싸고 질 좋은” 미국산 쇠고기를 즐기고 한· 미 양국 업계의 손해도 줄이며 분열된 국론도 치유할 방도를 찾아야 하는 것 아닌가.

**[[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/25/2009102500638.html|[사설] 청와대 ＂원칙 없는 남북정상회담 안 한다＂]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 26일, 35면)

청와대 이동관 홍보수석은 24일 "(남북정상회담 추진과 관련한) 이면협상이나 이면계약은 없을 것"이라고 말했다. 이 수석은 "(남북정상회담은) 민족을 위한 진정성이 담보돼야 하며 북핵문제 해결의 진전에 도움이 돼야 한다"며 "원칙 없는 만남, 만남을 위한 만남은 하지 않는다는 것이 변함없는 정부 입장"이라고 했다. 그는 "정치적, 정략적 계산을 깔고 협상을 하지도 않을 것이며 환상도 갖고 있지 않다. 필요한 상황이 오면 투명성 원칙도 지킬 것"이라고도 했다.

우리의 경우 남북정상회담의 필요성 자체는 인정하면서도 지난 두 차례 정상회담이 남북 간 최대 현안인 북핵문제를 완전히 제쳐놓은 바람에 많은 국민이 정상회담의 진정성과 효용성에 의문을 갖게 된 것이 사실이다. 이 때문에 이명박 대통령은 대선 당시 남북정상회담의 의제를 공개하고 절차도 투명하게 하겠다고 공약했었다.

남북관계의 특수성에 비춰 정상회담 성사의 과정 전체를 공개하라는 것은 무리한 일이다. 미 백악관은 중국과 수교 교섭 때 심지어 자국 외교당국에까지 비밀로 했고 언론에는 기만작전을 벌였다. 우리 국민이 바라는 투명성은 남북정상회담이 한반도 평화의 최대 위협요인인 북핵문제를 다루는 데 있어 겉과 속이 같아야 한다는 것이다. 김정일 위원장이 "한반도 비핵화는 김일성 주석의 유훈"이라는 거짓말을 되풀이하고 우리는 그것이 북핵문제에 무슨 진전이나 되는 양 포장하는 일이 계속돼선 안 된다는 것이다.

북핵문제의 근원은 미·북 문제이기에 앞서 남북문제다. 북핵으로 당장에 위협을 받고 있는 곳은 대한민국뿐이다. 북이 핵을 고집하는 이유도 남북 체제경쟁에서의 패배와 흡수 통일에 대한 두려움 때문이다.

북핵 협상에서 워싱턴과 평양이 서울을 빼놓고 갈 가능성을 우려하면서 남북회담에 초조감을 드러내는 것은 기본적으로 핵 협상은 미·북이 하고 남한은 대북 지원으로 분위기나 조성해야 한다는 고정관념을 바닥에 깔고 있다.

그러나 미·북이 핵 협상을 하더라도 최종적으로는 정전(停戰)체제 등 남북관계 현안이 핵심 이슈로 떠오를 수밖에 없고 한·미 공조가 이뤄지는 한 평양이 서울을 빼놓고 워싱턴으로 가는 것은 생각할 수 없다. 북도 그 사실을 알기에 남북정상회담을 바라고 있는 것이다. 

다음 남북정상회담은 20년 북핵 협상의 잘못된 구조를 깨고 남북과 미·북이 병행해 가는 정상화의 첫걸음이 돼야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3842490|[사설] 첫 북·미 접촉 성사 … 6자회담 복귀로 이어져야]]**

(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 23, 46면)

성 김 미 국무부 북핵특사와 이근 북한 외무성 미국국장이 24일 뉴욕에서 만났다. 버락 오바마 미 대통령 정부가 출범한 이후 첫 만남이다. 또 6자회담이 중단된 이후 북한의 2차 핵실험과 미사일 실험 발사, 이를 규탄하는 유엔 안전보장이사회의 대북 제재 결의 채택 등 한바탕 대치국면이 이어지는 와중에 성사된 만남이다. 북한의 비핵화 의지를 입증하는 가시적 조치와 6자회담 복귀 약속을 북·미대화의 전제조건으로 요구해온 미국이 일단 북한과 비공식 실무급 접촉에 나선 것이다. 양측은 북한의 6자회담 복귀 문제를 비롯해 비핵화 의지 표명, 북·미대화의 성격 규정, 미국이 제시한 핵 문제 해결을 위한 ‘포괄적 접근 방법’ 등 여러 현안을 논의했을 것으로 보인다. 이근 국장은 30일 뉴욕에서 열리는 북한 문제 토론회에도 참석한다. 당분간 북·미 간 접촉이 계속 이어지면서 북한의 6자회담 복귀가 성사될지 주목된다.

최근 북한은 미국과 한국·일본에 대해 적극적인 평화공세를 펴고 있다. 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표의 평양 방문 초청, 원자바오(溫家寶) 중국 총리의 평양 방문을 통한 6자회담 복귀 가능성 시사, 남북 정상회담 제안 등 북한의 행보는 전방위적이다. 그러나 북한의 비핵화 의지는 여전히 불투명한 상황이다. 미국과 핵군축 협상을 통해 비핵화를 추구할 것이라고 억지를 부리는 북한에 대해 이명박 대통령은 25일 “북한의 핵 포기 징후가 안 보인다”고 지적하기도 했다. 북한의 평화공세 의도를 의심할 수밖에 없는 상황인 것이다. 현재로선 북한의 의도는 갈수록 강화되는 국제사회의 대북 제재를 완화하고 한·미·일을 중심으로 한 대북 공조체제를 교란하려는 데 초점이 있는 것으로 판단된다.

한·미·일 3국은 북한의 2차 핵실험을 계기로 핵 문제 해결을 위해 ‘압박과 대화’의 투 트랙 접근법을 실행 중이다. 우리는 북한이 핵 포기를 돌이킬 수 없는 상황으로 진전시킬 때까지 이 방식을 계속 고수해야 한다고 믿는다. 물론 여건에 따라 압박과 대화 사이에서 균형점이 이동할 순 있을 것이다. 그러나 북한의 평화공세에 휘말려 성급하게 제재를 푸는 일은 피해야 한다. 조지 W 부시 전 미 정부 후반기에 미국이 북한의 집요한 요구에 밀려 방코델타아시아(BDA)에 대한 제재를 풀고 6자회담을 진전시켰다. 그 결과로 돌아온 것은 북한의 2차 핵실험이었다. 이제 북한은 공공연히 핵보유국임을 주장하고 이를 기정사실화하기 위해 획책하고 있다. 북한의 이런 의도는 어떤 경우에도 허용해선 안 된다. 궁극적으로 설득을 통한 북한 핵 포기도 반드시 달성해야 한다. 북한 지도부의 강력한 핵 보유 의지를 감안할 때 결코 쉽지 않은 목표들이다. 결국 북핵 문제는 관련국들과 국제사회 전체의 일관되고 끈기 있는 지속적인 노력 외에는 뾰족한 해법이 없는 문제다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3842627|보즈워스, 오바마 친서 갖고 평양행? 김정일 전격 방중?]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 26일 4~5면)

예영준 기자

북한 대화 공세 향후 시나리오
24일 이근 - 성 김 북·미 접촉

남북 비밀 접촉에 이어 오바마 미 행정부 출범 이후 첫 북·미 당국자 간 접촉이 24일 뉴욕에서 이뤄졌다. 미국을 방문 중인 이근 북한 외무성 미국 국장과 미국의 6자회담 수석대표인 성 김 국무부 대북 특사는 이날 뉴욕의 유엔주재 미국 대표부에서 1시간가량 회동했다. 26일 샌디에이고에서 열리는 동북아시아협력대화(NEACD) 참가차 미국을 방문한 이 국장은 이달 말까지의 체류기간 동안 성 김 특사와 두어 차례 더 만날 것으로 예상된다.

두 사람의 회동은 본격적인 북·미 양자 대화를 위한 예비 접촉의 성격이 짙다. 북핵 현안에 정통한 정부 당국자는 “미국이 북한과 직접 대화를 하기로 방침을 굳혔기 때문에 이번 접촉을 통해 북한의 입장을 점검한 뒤 장소와 시기를 확정할 것으로 보인다”며 “시기는 11월 중순 이후가 될 것 같다”고 내다봤다. 거론되는 시나리오는 이미 북한의 초청을 받은 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표가 평양 또는 제3국에서 강석주 외무성 제1부상과 협의하는 것이다. 평양에 갈 경우엔 김정일 국방위원장을 직접 만나 버락 오바마 대통령의 친서를 전달할 수도 있다. 북·미 대화의 결과에 따라 북한이 6자회담에 복귀하는 시나리오도 그려볼 수 있다. 북·미 간 첫 접촉이 이뤄진 것은 북한의 전방위 대화 공세와 대화와 제재를 병행한다는 미국의 ‘투트랙’ 전술이 맞물린 결과다. 앞서 김정일 국방위원장은 이달 초 방북한 원자바오 중국 총리에게 “한국·일본과의 관계 개선을 희망한다”는 메시지를 보냈다. 최근 싱가포르에서의 남북 비밀 접촉도 이 같은 흐름과 무관치 않다. 북·일 간 교섭도 일본의 새 정권 출범과 맞물려 재개될 가능성이 점쳐지고 있다. 이처럼 북·미 대화를 앞두고 전방위 대화 국면을 조성하는 것은 북한의 낯익은 협상 패턴 중 하나다.

또 하나 주목되는 것은 김 위원장의 전격 방중 가능성이다. 외교소식통은 “원 총리가 방북 당시 김 위원장을 초청한 것으로 안다”고 말했다. 지난주 베이징에 나타난 김양건 노동당 통전부장의 또 다른 임무는 김 위원장의 방중을 협의하기 위한 것이란 관측도 나온다. 김 부장은 당 국제부장으로 중국 공산당과의 ‘당 대 당’ 외교를 맡아 2000년대 들어 복원된 북·중 정상외교를 조율해 온 인물이기도 하다. 정부 당국자는 “북한의 평화 공세에는 5자 공조를 흩뜨리고 제재를 유명무실화시키려는 목적도 있는 것으로 보인다”고 말했다. 이를 위해 북한이 가장 먼저 자신의 편으로 끌어들여야 할 대상은 중국이다. 북·중 관계를 공고히 다지는 게 협상 전술 차원에서도 더 유리할 수 있다. 남북 대화는 최근 비밀 접촉이 공개되면서 당분간 모멘텀을 복구하기 어려울 것이란 관측이 지배적이다. 하지만 정부가 접촉 라인을 공개하지 않고 있는 데에는 비밀 창구를 살려두고 향후 사태 전개에 유연하게 대비하려는 의도가 있는 것으로 분석된다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전제를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1697.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 26, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun, All TVs 
Rapid Spread of New Flu; U.S. Declares Swine Flu Emergency, and ROK 
Reports 3,000 Infections a Day 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
At Least 136 Dead in Worst Bomb Attack in Baghdad 
in More Than Two Years 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
N. Korean Defectors Fail to Assimilate Into ROK Society 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
President Lee: "N. Korea's Intentions Remain Unclear. The North has 
Shown Few Signs of Making a Decision 
to Give up Nuclear Ambitions" 
 
 
Segye Ilbo 
War of Nerves between U.S. and N. Korea; U.S., 
North Hold Talks in New York, and U.S. Treasury Blacklists 
N. Korean Bank for Arms Deals 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
 
President Lee Myung-bak, in an Oct. 25 luncheon at the ASEAN+3 
Summit in Thailand, said that North Korea's intentions remain 
unclear and that the North has shown few signs of making a decision 
to give up its nuclear ambitions. (All) 
 
Lee Dong-kwan, Senior Presidential Secretary for Public Relations, 
said on Oct. 24 that, "There will be neither behind-the-scenes 
negotiations nor s-e-c-r-e-t agreement with the North" about an 
inter-Korean summit." (All) 
 
According to Stars and Stripes, Adm. Michael Mullen, Chairman of the 
U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, said during his recent visit to Seoul 
that the U.S. is considering deploying part of USFK to the Middle 
East in coming years. (Dong-a) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Ri Gun, Deputy North Korean Negotiator to the Six-Party Talks, met 
in New York on Oct. 24 with Sung Kim, Special Envoy for the 
Six-Party Talks. (All) 
 
On Oct. 23, the U.S. Treasury Department blacklisted a North Korean 
bank as a proliferator of weapons of mass destruction for its 
involvement in exporting ballistic missiles to Iran. (Dong-a, Segye, 
Seoul) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
The Oct. 24 meeting in New York between Ri Gun, Deputy North Korean 
Negotiator to the Six-Party Talks, and Sung Kim, U.S. Special Envoy 
for the Six-Party Talks, received wide press coverage today. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo described this meeting as a prelude to 
full-fledged bilateral talks between the two countries.  JoongAng 
observed: "One of the scenarios being discussed for bilateral 
 
SEOUL 00001697  002 OF 006 
 
 
U.S.-North Korea talks is that Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth ... would meet in Pyongyang or a third 
country with North Korea's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju. 
Should Bosworth go to Pyongyang, he may meet with North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il to deliver a personal letter from President 
Obama." 
 
In an editorial, JoongAng argued: "It appears that North Korea's 
(recent actions) are aimed at easing international sanctions which 
have intensified and disrupting cooperation between the ROK, the 
U.S. and Japan.  Following the North's second nuclear test, the 
three countries implemented a two-track approach of 'pressure and 
dialogue' to resolve the nuclear issue.  This approach should be 
maintained until the North takes irreversible steps toward 
denuclearization. ...  The North's current flurry of peace overtures 
should not in any way lead to a hasty lifting of sanctions against 
the country." 
 
President Lee Myung-bak was widely quoted as saying in an Oct. 25 
luncheon at the ASEAN+3 Summit in Thailand: "North Korea's 
intentions remain unclear.  The North has shown few signs of making 
a decision to give up its nuclear ambitions." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
CONCERNS OVER U.S. BEEF 
(Seoul Shinmun, October 26, 2009, page 30) 
 
By Lee Jun-han, Political Science Professor of the University of 
Incheon 
 
During a national policy coordination meeting held at the Central 
Government Complex, the new ROK prime minister threw out a question, 
"Why isn't imported U.S. beef used in the cafeteria of the 
government office?  During the National Assembly's audit that 
ensued, clues (why the U.S. beef is not used in the government 
office) were revealed.  Until now, imported U.S. beef including 
intestines has been inspected only with the naked eye without 
undergoing tissue inspection.  This U.S. beef has been served to 
auxiliary police who have no choice or power (to refuse the U.S. 
beef.)  More surprisingly, a considerable amount of U.S. beef has 
been consumed in the Taereung National Village where Korean national 
players exercise with the goal of enhancing Korea's standing in 
international sports. 
 
Living in the U.S. as a researcher, I go to grocery stores on 
weekends, where I often look at nicely packaged beef only with a 
watering mouth without buying it.  When I was studying in the U.S. 
before, I couldn't afford to buy beef.  But now I don't feel like 
(buying it), knowing that U.S. beef may cause health problems.  The 
U.S. beef imported to the ROK comes from cows more than 30 months 
old.  In contrast, beef distributed in the U.S. is mostly meat from 
cattle under 20 months of age and is considered safe.  I say to 
myself hypnotically that U.S. beef is safe, but I can't dispel my 
concerns easily. 
 
My anxiety further intensified after I read a terrifying article 
about U.S. beef.  According to the New York Times, a 22- year old 
young American woman suffered from diarrhea and spasms after eating 
a hamburger.  She fell into a coma for 9 weeks.  Her mother had 
purchased ground beef and made a hamburger.  But it turned out that 
the beef was contaminated with E coli.  The woman became paraplegic 
due to nerve damage.  I suddenly felt my legs numb upon recalling 
that I had had a hamburger at a (McDonalds) fast-food chain a few 
days ago. 
 
I cannot but suspect that good-quality beef isn't always used for 
hamburgers.  Allegedly, ground beef sometimes includes intestines or 
other parts, or even bones.  Also, other kinds of meat in addition 
to beef, and beef from other countries may be mixed into the ground 
beef. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001697  003 OF 006 
 
 
This October alone, at least three recalls of beef products were 
announced in the U.S.  Not only ground beef but also other kinds of 
products were subject to the recalls.  The recalls were issued 
because beef products may have been contaminated with E. coli or 
Specified Risk Materials (SRM) were not removed.  The problem is 
that one of the U.S. firms that issued a recall in October exports 
beef to the ROK.  One way or another, U.S. beef is fueling consumer 
anxiety both inside and outside the U.S. 
 
In the ROK, U.S. imports increased until October in 2008, but after 
that, they began decreasing as the global economic crisis hurt the 
ROK economy and drove up the exchange rate.  Weak consumer 
confidence in U.S. beef was also at play.  A U.S. beef importer, who 
sued MBC's "PD Diary," an investigative television newsmagazine, and 
an actress (for allegedly misleading the public into a boycott of 
U.S. beef products and damaging sales), argues that he incurred a 
loss of more than 400 billion won due to candlelight protests.  In 
this situation, it is evident that the U.S. livestock industry has 
failed to achieve its target profits and market expansion in the 
ROK. 
 
On October 10, Japan banned all U.S. beef imports from a U.S. 
meatpacker, saying that bovine spinal columns, which are banned 
under a bilateral agreement, were found in beef shipments from the 
plant.  The Hatoyama Administration strongly said that it did not 
plan to renegotiate to ease the import terms as the U.S. demanded. 
In Taiwan, there is no report, either, that the nation's import 
terms for U.S. beef have been eased as much as those of the ROK.  In 
the middle of the candlelight protests, ROKG officials said that 
they would take action after watching the results of U.S. beef trade 
negotiations of Japan or Taiwan.  But what are they doing now? 
Isn't this the time for the Prime Minister to find a solution at a 
fundamental level, rather than at the level of a cafeteria?  Doesn't 
he have to find a solution in which Korean consumers enjoy "cheap 
and quality" U.S. beef with confidence, thereby reducing the loss of 
ROK and U.S. industries and patching up divisions in public 
opinion? 
 
 
A CHANCE TO BRING TRANSPARENCY TO INTER-KOREAN DEALINGS 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 26, 2009, page 35) 
 
Cheong Wa Dae spokesman Lee Dong-kwan on Saturday said, "As we have 
already stated, we will not pursue a summit with any hidden 
political agenda."  Briefing reporters on rumors of a possible 
inter-Korean summit, Lee said any such meeting must be in line with 
the genuine interests of the public and help in the resolution of 
the nuclear impasse.  "I stress again it is our government's 
unchanging stance that we will not hold an inter-Korean summit that 
will simply end in a meeting of the leaders," Lee said.  He added 
Seoul has no fantasies about such a meeting and pledged the 
government would be clear and open about any arrangements when the 
time comes. 
 
Many have grown skeptical about the value of a summit after the 
first two were held without even touching on the main issue of the 
North Korean nuclear program.  As a result, President Lee Myung-bak 
pledged during his election campaign to be transparent about the 
agenda and arrangement process. 
 
Considering the nature of inter-Korean relations, it could be 
difficult to reveal the entire process of arranging a summit. 
During its historic contact with Beijing, the White House kept the 
process s-e-c-r-e-t even from its own diplomats.  The transparency 
the public wants to see is not about revealing every little detail 
of the process but means that they want the leaders of the two 
countries to be honest about matters like the nuclear issue.  North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-il has said denuclearization on the Korean 
Peninsula was his father's "last wish."  But there is no point 
trying to make such rhetoric look like some sort of major progress 
in the nuclear dismantlement process. 
 
The North Korean nuclear problem is at the root of inter-Korean 
relations.  The ROK is the only country that is directly threatened 
 
SEOUL 00001697  004 OF 006 
 
 
by North Korea's nuclear weapons.  The reason the North insists on 
keeping its nuclear weapons is that it is afraid of being defeated 
and absorbed by the ROK. 
 
Some people here fear that North Korea and the U.S. may leave the 
ROK out of any nuclear negotiations and are desperately hoping for 
an inter-Korean summit.  These fears are probably at the bottom of 
the rumors about a possible summit.  They are based on the erroneous 
belief that nuclear discussions should be conducted between North 
Korea and the U.S., while the ROK should work to create an amicable 
atmosphere for such discussions by promising economic aid to and 
holding a summit with North Korea. 
 
But even if the U.S. and North Korea do hold nuclear talks, key 
issues including turning the armistice into a peace treaty must 
involve the ROK.  As long as Seoul and Washington maintain a close 
alliance, the North would not even be able to consider leaving the 
ROK out.  North Korea knows this, and that is why it is hoping for 
an inter-Korean summit. 
 
This is an opportunity to bring greater transparency to inter-Korean 
negotiations, which have been flawed for the last 20 years, and to 
set a framework for regular talks between the two Koreas and the 
U.S.  The next inter-Korean summit must be a decisive step in that 
direction. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
FIRST U.S. - N. KOREA CONTACT SINCE THE LAUNCH OF THE OBAMA 
ADMINISTRATION SHOULD LEAD TO THE NORTH'S RETURN TO SIX-PARTY TALKS 
 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 23, 2009, page 46) 
 
Sung Kim, Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks and Ri Gun, Deputy 
North Korean Negotiator to the Six-Party Talks had a meeting in New 
York on October 24.  This is the first U.S.-North Korea contact 
since the Obama Administration took office.  The meeting was held 
while the two countries are still engaging in confrontation 
following North Korea's second nuclear test and missile launches and 
the UN Security Council's resolution condemning these acts.  The 
unofficial working-level contact came even though the U.S. has been 
demanding as preconditions for U.S.-North Korea talks that North 
Korea demonstrate its willingness to achieve denuclearization and 
promise to rejoin the Six-Party Talks.  It is likely that the two 
officials discussed several issues including North Korea's return to 
the Six-Party Talks, its willingness to pursue denuclearization, 
U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks and a U.S.-envisioned comprehensive 
approach for resolving the nuclear issue.  Ri Gun will also 
participate in talks on the North Korean nuclear issue, which will 
be held in New York on October 30.  Attention is turning to whether 
the first one-on-one U.S.-North Korea contact will lead to the 
North's return to the Six-Party Talks. 
 
Recently, North Korea has mounted charm offensives at the U.S., the 
ROK and Japan.  In a series of conciliatory moves, the North invited 
Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth to 
visit Pyongyang, hinted at the possibility that it may rejoin the 
Six-Party Talks during a visit by Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, and 
proposed inter-Korean talks.  However, it remains unclear whether 
Pyongyang is really willing to give up its nuclear weapons program. 
ROK President Lee Myung-bak said on October 25 that the North has 
shown few signs of making a decision to give up its nuclear 
ambitions while Pyongyang insists that it intends to pursue 
denuclearization through nuclear disarmament talks with the U.S. 
Therefore, we can only question as to North Korea's true intentions 
behind the peace gestures.  It appears that North Korea's (recent 
actions) are aimed at easing international sanctions which have 
intensified and disrupting cooperation between the ROK, the U.S. and 
Japan. 
 
Following the North's second nuclear test, the three countries 
implemented a two-track approach of 'pressure and dialogue' to 
 
SEOUL 00001697  005 OF 006 
 
 
resolve the nuclear issue.  This approach should be maintained until 
the North takes irreversible steps toward denuclearization. 
Depending on the situation, equilibrium may shift between pressure 
and dialogue.  The North's current flurry of peace overtures should 
not in any way lead to a hasty lifting of sanctions against the 
country.  Former U.S. President George W. Bush lifted sanctions on 
the Banco Delta Asia (BDA) bank due to North Korea's relentless 
demands and made progress on the Six-Party Talks.  However, this 
only resulted in North Korea carrying out a second nuclear test. 
Now, North Korea is openly claiming itself as a nuclear state and 
scheming to make it an established fact.  This should not be 
allowed.  Ultimately, we should persuade the North to abandon its 
nuclear weapons.  This is not an easy goal, given the North Korean 
leadership's unwavering commitment to nuclear development.  After 
all, the North Korean nuclear issue can be resolved only when the 
entire international community, including all Six Party Talks member 
countries, makes consistent and enduring efforts (to stop the North 
from nuclear development.) 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
BOSWORTH VISITS PYONGYANG WITH OBAMA'S LETTER? KIM JONG-IL VISITS 
CHINA? 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 26, 2009, Pages 4-5) 
 
By Reporter Ye Young-joon 
 
After North Korea's charm offensive, how will things pan out? 
 
Contact made between Ri Gun and Sung Kim on October 24 
 
Following a s-e-c-r-e-t inter-Korean meeting, the first contact 
between North Korean and U.S. officials since the launch of the 
Obama Administration was made in New York on October 24.  Deputy 
North Korean Negotiator to the Six-Party Talks Ri Gun, who is 
visiting the U.S., and U.S. Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks 
Sung Kim had a meeting for about an hour at the U.S. mission to the 
UN.  Ri, who arrived in the U.S. to attend the Northeast Asia 
Cooperation Dialogue set for October 26 in San Diego, is expected to 
meet with Kim a few more times during his stay until the end of this 
month. 
 
The meeting between the two officials can be seen as a prelude to 
full-fledged bilateral talks between the U.S. and North Korea.  An 
(ROKG) official well-versed in the North Korean nuclear issue 
predicted, "Since the U.S. has already decided to have direct 
dialogue with North Korea, the U.S., during the Ri-Kim meeting, is 
expected to check Pyongyang's position and determine the venue and 
timing for bilateral talks with the North.  The date (for the talks) 
is likely to be after mid-November."  One of the scenarios being 
discussed for bilateral U.S.-North Korea talks is that Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth, who has 
already been invited by the North, would meet in Pyongyang or a 
third country with North Korea's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang 
Sok-ju.  Should Bosworth go to Pyongyang, he may meet with North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-il to deliver a personal letter from 
President Obama.  Under another scenario, North Korea would return 
to the Six-Party Talks, depending on the outcome of U.S.-North Korea 
dialogue.  The first contact between the U.S. and North Korea was 
made possible because North Korea's charm offensive squared with the 
U.S.'s "two-track" approach of dialogue and sanctions (toward the 
North.)  In early October when Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visited 
Pyongyang, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il had sent him a message 
that "We hope to improve relations with the ROK and Japan."  The 
recent inter-Korean s-e-c-r-e-t contact in Singapore should also be 
seen in this context.  North Korea-Japan negotiations are also 
expected to resume now that the new Japanese government has taken 
office.    The efforts to create a favorable atmosphere for talks 
before the dialogue with the U.S. is consistent with North Korea's 
negotiating style. 
 
It is also possible that North Korean leader Kim Jong-Il will visit 
 
SEOUL 00001697  006 OF 006 
 
 
China.  A diplomatic source said, "We believe that during his visit 
to the North, Premier Wen invited Kim."  There is also speculation 
that, when Kim Yang-gon, head of the Unification Front Department of 
North Korea's Workers' Party, appeared in Beijing last week, one of 
his missions was to discuss North Korean leader Kim's visit to 
China.  Kim Yang-gon, who is in charge of relations with China's 
Communist Party, has coordinated summit diplomacy between North 
Korea and China, which was restored in the 2000s.  An (ROK) 
government official noted, "It appears that North Korea's charm 
offensive is also aimed at undermining cooperation among the five 
parties and taking 'the teeth out of the sanctions.'"  To this end, 
North Korea should first win over China.  Strengthening relations 
with China would also be advantageous for North Korea at the 
bargaining table.  When it comes to inter-Korean dialogue, a 
prevalent view is that since the s-e-c-r-e-t meeting has now been 
made public, it may be difficult, for the time being, to restore the 
momentum (for dialogue).  Observers say, however, that the reason 
why the ROKG has not disclosed its lines of contact with the North 
is that it wants to keep the lines open and deal with future 
developments in a flexible manner. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file> 