^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1768  |  2009-11-05  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 5일 ======

미분류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001768

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=83982&page=100&total=3622|서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 5일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/04/02 21:27//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 한국일보, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
"세종시 수정안 1월까지 제시" 정부, 공식 선언

중앙일보
MB, 세종시 대안 기준 제시

동아일보
12억 시장 '韓-인도 CEPA'내주 비준 안되면 1년 늦춰져

한겨레 신문
이 대통령, 세종시 원안 백지화

===== 국내 동향 =====

이명박 대통령은 북한이 핵 야욕을 거둬들인다면 남북 경협이 확대될 것이라고 말했다((역주: 실제 기사 내용="이 대통령은 “남북한 경제협력 확대는 동북아 지역뿐 아니라 전세계의 평화와 지속 발전에도 크게 기여할 것”이라며 “이를 위해서는 남북한 협력의 큰 장애 요소인 북핵 문제가 해결돼야 한다”고 덧붙였다.")). (조선, 중앙, 동아, 세계, 서울)

북한이 대북 인도적 지원사업을 하는 남한 민간단체들에 식량 부족을 호소하며 긴급 지원을 요청하고 있는 것으로 알려졌다. 그러나 북한 당국은 남한이 지난달 26일 옥수수 1만 t을 지원하겠다고 제의한 것에 대해서는 4일까지 아무런 답변을 하지 않고 있다. (동아)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

워싱턴 소식통은 3일(현지시간) “최근 이근 북한 외무성 미국국장과 성 김 미국 측 6자회담 수석대표 간 접촉에서 양자대화 개최와 관련해 60~70%의 합의를 본 것으로 안다”고 말했다. ([[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3529744|중앙]])

다수의 외교 소식통은 미국 싱크 탱크 대표와 미 외교협회 대표가 이 달 북미 관계의 돌파구 마련을 위해 이 달 북한을 방문할 예정이라고 전했다. ([[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3529745|중앙]])
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

중도 우파 중앙일보는 “최근 이근 북한 외무성 미국 국장과 성 김 미국 측 6자회담 수석대표 간 접촉에서 양자대화 개최와 관련해 60~70%의 합의를 본 것으로 안다”고 말했다고 내부 지면에서 보도하였다.

중앙일보는 개별 보도에서 미국 싱크 탱크 대표와 미 외교협회 대표가 이 달 북미 관계의 돌파구 마련을 위해 북한을 방문할 예정이라는 다수의 외교 소식통의 전언을 전했다. 이 보도에서 정부 당국자를 포함한 관계자들은 “민감한 시점에 이뤄지는 이들의 방북 결과가 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표의 방북 등 북·미 대화의 향방에 중대한 영향을 미칠 것으로 예상된다”고 말했다고 전했다.

보수 동아일보의 기사 제목: <폐연료봉 재처리” vs 보즈워스 방북결정 늦추기> 중도 한국일보 사설: "문제는 소모적인 샅바싸움이 길어지면 모처럼 형성된 6자회담 재개를 위한 대화 동력이 상실될 우려가 있다는 점이다. …북한도 미국 내 보수강경파의 압박을 의식하지 않을 수 없는 오마바 행정부의 입장을 감안할 필요가 있다. …(한국 정부는) 남북관계를 활용해 6자회담 재개를 촉진하는 길을 찾아야 한다."

대다수 한국 언론은 “김정일 북한 국방위원장은 협상을 오래 하면 오바마 미 대통령이 임기가 다 돼서 바뀌고, 한국 대통령도 바뀌고, 중국 국가주석도 바뀌면, 그러면 그것을(협상을) 다시 시작해야 될 것이다. 무한정 다시 할 수 없는 것이라고 생각한다”는 이명박 대통령의 [[http://news.kmib.co.kr/article/view.asp?arcid=0001337906&code=11121600|4일 발언]]을 다루었다.

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://media.daum.net/breakingnews/view.html?cateid=1053&newsid=20091104221112337&p=hankooki|[사설] 혼란스러운 북미 양자회담 움직임]]**(한국일보, 2009년 11월 5일, 39면)

6자회담 재개를 위한 북미의 움직임이 혼란스럽다. 북한은 3일 조선중앙통신을 통해 폐연료봉 8,000개의 재처리를 완료하고 추출된 플루토늄을 무기화하는 데 주목할 만한 성과가 있었다고 밝혔다. 북미 양자회담 등을 논의하기 위한 리근 외무성 미국국장의 방미일정이 끝나자마자 압박카드를 꺼낸 것이다. 바로 전날에는 "미국이 아직 우리와 마주앉을 준비가 되어있지 않다면 우리도 제 갈 길을 가면 될 것"이라고 했다.

북한의 이런 태도는 미 국무부가 리근 국장과의 접촉결과를 긍정 평가한 것과 대비된다. 리근 국장과 성 킴 미국 6자회담 수석대표의 뉴욕접촉을 통해 북한의 다자회담 복귀 전 두 차례 북미 양자회담 개최 등에 합의했다는 미 외교전문지의 보도도 미국 측의 긍정적 분위기를 반영한다. 하지만 몇 가지 핵심적인 사항에 대해 이견이 좁혀지지 않았고, 이것이 북한의 강한 불만으로 표출된 것으로 보인다.

그러나 이런 반발이 북미 양자회담과 6자회담 재개로 잡힌 큰 흐름을 흐트러뜨릴 정도는 아닐 것이다. 폐연료봉 재처리 완료와 무기화 진전은 북한이 9월 유엔 안보리 의장에게 낸 서한에서 밝힌 내용을 재탕한 것으로 파장이 제한적이다. 한미 양국 정부가 유엔안보리 1718호 및 1874호 위반이라면서도 신중하게 대처하는 것은 이런 판단 때문일 것이다. 북한의 강경 압박도 판을 깨기보다는 막판 협상에서 우위를 점하려는 전술적 성격이 강해 보인다.

문제는 소모적인 샅바싸움이 길어지면 모처럼 형성된 6자회담 재개를 위한 대화 동력이 상실될 우려가 있다는 점이다. 미국은 6자회담 재개와 핵 폐기에 대해 보다 확고한 약속을 받아낸 뒤 양자회담에 응하고 싶어하지만 북한이 우라늄 농축강화 등의 카드로 맞설 경우 화를 더 키우게 된다. 북한도 미국 내 보수강경파의 압박을 의식하지 않을 수 없는 오마바 행정부의 입장을 감안할 필요가 있다. 북미 간의 힘겨루기 국면에 우리 정부가 할 일은 많지 않지만 그렇다고 손 놓고만 있어서는 안 된다. 남북관계를 활용해 6자회담 재개를 촉진하는 길을 찾아야 한다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3859662|한·미 FTA 제동 건 ‘실세’ 이매뉴얼]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 11월 5일, 14면)

김정욱 워싱턴 특파원

지난달 말 버락 오바마 미국 대통령 취임 이후 처음으로 백악관 각료급 회의에서 한·미 자유무역협정(FTA) 체결 문제가 논의됐다. 백악관 고위 참모와 행정부 장·차관급 관리들이 참석한 이 자리에서 국무부와 미 무역대표부(USTR) 측은 “한·미 FTA를 이른 시일 내에 적극적으로 추진해야 한다”고 주장했다. 그러나 오바마의 최측근으로 꼽히는 람 이매뉴얼(사진) 백악관 비서실장이 “신중하게(cautious) 접근해야 한다”며 제동을 걸었다고 워싱턴 외교 소식통이 4일(현지시간) 밝혔다.

이 소식통은 “오바마 방한에 앞서 지난달 말 백악관에서 열린 각료급 회의에서 한·미 FTA가 주요 의제로 논의됐다”며 “오바마 정부 들어 처음 있는 일”이라고 말했다. 이어 “국무부·USTR 등은 한·미 FTA에 적극적으로 나서야 한다고 주장했으나 회의에 불참한 이매뉴얼이 참모를 통해 ‘신중해야 한다’는 뜻을 전해와 결론을 못 냈다”고 전했다. 한국대사관은 이를 청와대·외교부에 보고한 것으로 전해졌다.

오바마 행정부가 지난달 말 백악관 각료급 회의에서 처음으로 한·미 자유무역협정(FTA) 문제를 논의한 것은 두 가지 점에서 큰 의미를 지닌다. 먼저 오바마 정부가 한·미 FTA의 중요성을 인정하고, 범정부 차원의 조율 작업에 들어갔다는 사실을 시사한다. 그간 한·미 FTA는 건강보험 개혁 등에 밀려 뒷방 신세였다. 그런 상황에서 백악관 각료급 회의의 테이블에 올랐다는 건 이 문제가 새롭게 부상하고 있다는 걸 의미한다. 각료급 회의는 백악관 내 4단계 회의 중 위에서 두 번째다. 대통령이 직접 참석하는 최고위급 회의 바로 아래 단계로 중요 안건만을 골라 논의한다. 그 때문에 한 외교소식통은 “미국 내에서 죽은 거나 진배없던 한·미 FTA가 살아나는 것 같다”고 평했다.

이런 기류에는 이달 19일로 예정된 한·미 정상회담이 작용한 것으로 보인다. 이명박 대통령이 오바마에게 한·미 FTA의 조속한 체결을 제기할 것으로 관측되기 때문이다. 주미 한국 대사관 관계자는 “내년 여름부터는 11월 중간선거 국면에 돌입하기 때문에 오바마 행정부나 의회가 한·미 FTA를 처리할 동력이 떨어질 가능성이 크다”며 “건강보험 개혁법안이 정리될 것으로 보이는 연말이나 연초부터 한·미 FTA가 미국의 정책 추진 우선순위에 들어가도록 하는 것이 급선무”라고 말했다.

오바마 정부 내에서 어디가 걸림돌인지 알게 됐다는 점도 중요하다. 한·미 FTA에 소극적인 이매뉴얼과 의회 담당 파트가 입장을 바꾸지 않는 한 상황이 나아지지 않을 전망이다. 이매뉴얼은 한·미 FTA 같은 양국간 협정보다는 다자간 협력 체제를 선호하는 것으로 전해졌다. 2002년 시카고 하원의원에 당선되면서 같은 주 상원의원이던 오바마와 친분을 맺은 이매뉴얼은 람보라는 별명에 걸맞게 강성 정치인이다. 올 초 한 하원의원이 그에게 전화를 했더니 “너무 바빠 통화하기 어렵다”며 옆에 있던 오바마에게 전화기를 넘겼다는 일화는 유명하다. 그는 미국 역사상 최강의 백악관 비서실장이란 소리를 듣고 있다.

**[[http://news.donga.com/Politics/3/00/20091105/23896573/2|北美, 회담 모양 갖춰놓고 ‘물밑 신경전’]]**(동아, 11월 5일, 5면)

김영식 기자

“폐연료봉 재처리” vs 보즈워스 방북결정 늦추기

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책특별대표의 북한 방문 문제를 둘러싸고 미국과 북한이 치열한 신경전을 벌이고 있다. 북-미 간 대화기류에도 불구하고 북한은 핵개발 진전을 선전하고 있고, 미국은 보즈워스 대표의 방북 결정을 늦추고 있다.

보즈워스 대표의 방북을 위한 외형적 조건들은 나름대로 갖춰지고 있다는 게 대체적인 관측이다. 정부 당국자는 “미국은 그동안 보즈워스 대표가 강석주 북한 외무성 제1부상 또는 그보다 고위급이 돼야 북-미 접촉을 가질 수 있다는 태도를 보였다”고 말했다. 이와 관련해 외교전문지 포린폴리시는 3일 “이근 북한 외무성 미국국장은 최근 6자회담 미국 측 수석대표인 성 김 대북특사와의 막후 접촉에서 강석주 제1부상 면담 요구에 별다른 이견을 표시하지 않았다”고 전했다. 일차적인 걸림돌은 해소됐다는 뜻이다.

다만 문제는 미 행정부가 보즈워스 방북이 별다른 성과를 내지 못할 가능성에 대해 우려하고 있다는 점이다. 외교소식통은 “미 행정부 내에는 버락 오바마 행정부의 대북 접촉이 별다른 성과를 내지 못하면 보수파로부터 역공을 받을 것으로 우려하는 기류가 있다”고 설명했다. 이런 이유로 보즈워스 대표가 방북해 강 제1부상을 만나더라도 북한을 6자회담으로 복귀시키지 못할 가능성 때문에 쉽사리 방북 결정을 내리지 못하고 있다는 것이다.

북한으로서도 김정일 국방위원장이 북-미 양자회담의 성과에 따라 다자회담 참여를 검토하겠다고 밝힌 상태여서 협상 실무자들이 섣불리 진전된 태도를 내놓기 어려운 처지다. 북한 외무성 대변인이 2일 “미국이 아직 우리와 마주앉을 준비가 되어 있지 않다면 제 갈 길을 가겠다”고 으름장을 놓은 것도 미국의 태도 변화를 촉구하기 위한 것으로 풀이된다.

양측의 신경전이 앞으로 어떻게 전개될지는 현재로선 가늠하기 쉽지 않다. 정부 고위당국자는 4일 “현재 북한은 미국과 만나 대화하는 데 더 주안점을 두고 있는 반면 미국은 만나서 어떤 결과(6자회담 복귀)를 만들어낼 것을 기대하고 있을 것”이라고 설명했다. 아직은 접점이 만들어졌다고 보기엔 어렵다는 얘기인 셈이다.

한편 이언 켈리 미 국무부 대변인은 북한의 ‘폐연료봉 8000개 재처리’ 주장에 대해 “모두가 신중하고, 수사(rhetoric)를 완화하며, 지역 내 긴장을 일으킬 어떤 행동도 하지 않아야 한다”며 추가적인 도발행위를 자제할 것을 촉구했다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>​-----BEGIN PKCS7-----MIIHPwYJKoZIhvcNAQcEoIIHMDCCBywCAQExggEwMIIBLAIBADCBlDCBjjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMxCzAJBgNVBAgTAkNBMRYwFAYDVQQHEw1Nb3VudGFpbiBWaWV3MRQwEgYDVQQKEwtQYXlQYWwgSW5jLjETMBEGA1UECxQKbGl2ZV9jZXJ0czERMA8GA1UEAxQIbGl2ZV9hcGkxHDAaBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWDXJlQHBheXBhbC5jb20CAQAwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEBBQAEgYBd+/​HeuCYixamjPXNftIU59sb0XD9ZKKgCBcTcYeajIzAWC7yEypt1lxRKNYT3HOH4P8xUMLNzWP9a7U9TuKWl4dRn9E1k7I3uL6bQULmVcsLZeN6sSoyK9Rqr/​o4Bywe6VRxp3RoTrcAVbgXPM9AAstIfNPDE69dVrHat10vyczELMAkGBSsOAwIaBQAwgbwGCSqGSIb3DQEHATAUBggqhkiG9w0DBwQI6NkKGfI+A0+AgZgivFcgUkPwQs1gTK5zYX5iMEoqI7Y5I/​QaUOr5sZxX0DvD4ek6dQOHlHOMHg6WlNVH/​dc5rTNphoDDtg47JMhRhtu5UJJaFrSmGMzh2jMpKQzuUoBpemUjWhFDLTrydI5b/​+o4lFAC/​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​Za+GJ/​qwUCAwEAAaOB7jCB6zAdBgNVHQ4EFgQUlp98u8ZvF71ZP1LXChvsENZklGswgbsGA1UdIwSBszCBsIAUlp98u8ZvF71ZP1LXChvsENZklGuhgZSkgZEwgY4xCzAJBgNVBAYTAlVTMQswCQYDVQQIEwJDQTEWMBQGA1UEBxMNTW91bnRhaW4gVmlldzEUMBIGA1UEChMLUGF5UGFsIEluYy4xEzARBgNVBAsUCmxpdmVfY2VydHMxETAPBgNVBAMUCGxpdmVfYXBpMRwwGgYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFg1yZUBwYXlwYWwuY29tggEAMAwGA1UdEwQFMAMBAf8wDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQADgYEAgV86VpqAWuXvX6Oro4qJ1tYVIT5DgWpE692Ag422H7yRIr/​9j/​iKG4Thia/​Oflx4TdL+IFJBAyPK9v6zZNZtBgPBynXb048hsP16l2vi0k5Q2JKiPDsEfBhGI+HnxLXEaUWAcVfCsQFvd2A1sxRr67ip5y2wwBelUecP3AjJ+YcxggGaMIIBlgIBATCBlDCBjjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMxCzAJBgNVBAgTAkNBMRYwFAYDVQQHEw1Nb3VudGFpbiBWaWV3MRQwEgYDVQQKEwtQYXlQYWwgSW5jLjETMBEGA1UECxQKbGl2ZV9jZXJ0czERMA8GA1UEAxQIbGl2ZV9hcGkxHDAaBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWDXJlQHBheXBhbC5jb20CAQAwCQYFKw4DAhoFAKBdMBgGCSqGSIb3DQEJAzELBgkqhkiG9w0BBwEwHAYJKoZIhvcNAQkFMQ8XDTE1MDQxOTA0MjMwN1owIwYJKoZIhvcNAQkEMRYEFAG0z/​c0VdXvYZxtxEorY/​BYbYT2MA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBAQUABIGAQ+u+8qzzKPhRvtviukCKuSSypNWbgmI/​M1xkcCgiV6qJt9UXEtfd1Mqio9lczdic86Tlxzs0fNi8QJ/​D8I+p7ITBARP/​oPYacfLglP5oKaokLl/​wr9VSn7TiqHPjwJuotJNrC48Xh9UO/​rK9/​bOtlb2rgyCsCFwAi8p8F3HOLVA=-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1768.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001768 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 5, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Top Headlines 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, 
Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
Alternative Plan for Sejong City to be Presented by January 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Goals to Revise Sejong City Plan Suggested 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Possibility of One-Year Delay in Implementing ROK-India Trade Deal 
if National Assembly Fails to Ratify It Next Week 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
President Lee Scraps Original Sejong City Plan to Relocate 
Government Offices to Chungcheong Province 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
President Lee Myung-bak, during a Nov. 4 speech in Seoul, said that 
inter-Korean economic cooperation will be expanded if North Korea 
gives up its nuclear ambitions. (Chosun, JoongAng, Dong-a, Segye, 
Seoul) 
 
According to a local civic group official, North Korea is asking ROK 
civic organizations to provide emergency food aid to the country. 
The North, meanwhile, has yet to respond to the ROKG's offer of 
10,000 tons of corn in aid. (Dong-a) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to a source in Washington, the U.S. and North Korea 
reached a 60-70 percent agreement on holding bilateral talks during 
recent contacts between Sung Kim, Special Envoy for the Six-Party 
Talks, and Ri Gun, the North's No. 2 nuclear negotiator. (JoongAng) 
 
According to multiple diplomatic sources, representatives of the 
U.S. think tank, the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), will visit 
North Korea this month to explore possibilities for a breakthrough 
in U.S.-North Korea relations. (JoongAng) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Right-of-center JoonAng Ilbo carried an inside-page report quoting a 
source in Washington as saying on Nov. 3 that the U.S. and North 
Korea reached a 60-70 percent agreement on holding bilateral talks 
during recent contacts between Sung Kim, Special Envoy for the 
Six-Party Talks, and Ri Gun, the North's No. 2 nuclear negotiator. 
 
In a separate report, JoongAng also quoted multiple diplomatic 
sources as saying yesterday that representatives of the U.S. think 
tank, the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), will visit North Korea 
this month to explore possibilities for a breakthrough in U.S. - 
North Korea relations.  The report went on to quote an ROKG source 
as commenting: "This visit, coming at a critical juncture in U.S. - 
North Korea ties, is expected to have a significant impact on the 
direction of U.S. - North Korea dialogue, including a visit to 
Pyongyang by Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo wrote in the headline: "Reprocessing of 
Spent Fuel Rods vs. Delayed Decision on Bosworth's Trip to N. Korea; 
 
SEOUL 00001768  002 OF 004 
 
 
N. Korea, U.S. Engage in War of Nerves."  Moderate Hankook Ilbo 
editorialized: "The problem is that if this exhaustive tug-of-war 
(between the U.S. and North Korea) is prolonged, the hard-won 
momentum for dialogue to resume the Six-Party Talks may disappear. 
... North Korea needs to consider the position of the Obama 
Administration which faces pressure from hardliners in the U.S.  ... 
 The ROKG should seek ways to facilitate a resumption of the 
Six-Party Talks through inter-Korean relations." 
 
Most ROK media covered yesterday's remarks by President Lee 
Myung-bak, in which he urged North Korean leader Kim Jong-il to give 
up his nuclear ambitions, saying: "If Kim Jong-il drags out 
negotiations, President Barack Obama will leave office, the ROK and 
Chinese presidents will change.  Then he has to start (the 
negotiations) all over again.  We can't be in negotiations 
forever." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
MOVES FOR U.S. - N. KOREA DIRECT TALKS CONFUSING 
(Hankook Ilbo, November 5, 2009, page 39) 
 
The U.S. and North Korea are making confusing moves towards 
bilateral talks to restart the Six-Party Talks.  North Korea's 
official Korean Central News Agency said on November 3 that North 
Korea successfully completed reprocessing 8,000 spent fuel rods in 
late August and made remarkable achievements in weaponizing the 
extracted plutonium.  The North issued this statement apparently to 
put pressure on the U.S. as soon as Ri Gun, Director General of 
American Affairs at North Korea's Foreign Ministry wrapped up his 
tour of the U.S. to discuss the prospect of U.S.-North Korea 
bilateral talks.  Just a day earlier, Pyongyang said that if the 
U.S. is not ready to sit down face to face, North Korea will go its 
own way. 
 
This North Korean attitude contrasts with the U.S. State 
Department's positive assessment of U.S.-North Korea contact.  A 
U.S. foreign affairs magazine also carried a positive report that 
North Korea agreed to hold two rounds of bilateral talks with the 
U.S. before rejoining the Six-Party Talks when Ri Gun and Sung Kim, 
Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks met in New York.  But it seems 
that they could not iron out differences on some key issues, drawing 
ire from North Korea. 
 
However, this maneuver by North Korea will unlikely cast a gloom 
over ongoing U.S. efforts to hold bilateral talks with the North and 
resume the Six-Party Talks.  (However,) North Korea's claim on the 
reprocessing of spent fuel rods and weaponization of extracted 
plutonium is likely to have limited repercussions because the North 
already made the same statement in a letter it sent to the UN 
Security Council in September.  This is why the U.S. and the ROK are 
responding cautiously, while criticizing the North for violating 
UNSC Resolutions 1718 and 1874.  It seems that North Korea's 
hard-line behavior is a strategic decision aimed at gaining the 
upper hand in negotiations. 
 
The problem is that if this exhaustive tug-of-war (between the U.S. 
and North Korea) is prolonged, the hard-won momentum for dialogue to 
resume the Six-Party Talks may disappear.  The U.S. wants to enter 
into bilateral talks after receiving firm assurances from the North 
that it will rejoin the Six-Party Talks and give up its nuclear 
program.  However, if North Korea responds by playing the "nuclear 
card" such as by increasing uranium enrichment, it will make things 
worse.  North Korea needs to consider the position of the Obama 
Administration which faces pressure from hardliners in the U.S. 
Even if the ROKG has little to do amid the tug-of-war between the 
U.S. and North Korea, it should not just sit on its hands.  The ROKG 
should seek ways to facilitate a resumption of the Six-Party Talks 
through inter-Korean relations. 
 
 
FEATURES 
 
SEOUL 00001768  003 OF 004 
 
 
-------- 
 
WHITE HOUSE CHIEF OF STAFF CALLS FOR CAUTIOUS APPROACH TO KORUS FTA 
 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 5, 2009, page 14) 
 
By Washington correspondent Kim Jeong-wook 
 
The Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA) issue has been 
discussed for the first time at a White House Cabinet-level meeting 
since the inauguration of the Obama Administration.  With senior 
advisors, secretaries and deputy secretaries participating in the 
meeting, which took place at the end of last month, the U.S. State 
of Department and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) 
argued that (the USG) should actively move towards ratification of 
the KORUS FTA.  However, a diplomatic source in Washington said on 
November 4 (local time) that White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel 
called for a cautious approach to the KORUS FTA, putting a brake on 
the progress of the trade pact. 
 
The source said that, ahead of President Obama's visit to the ROK, 
the KORUS FTA was discussed as a main topic at the Cabinet-level 
meeting, adding that this was the first Cabinet-level meeting that 
has dealt with the issue since President Obama took office.  The 
source quoted the State Department and the USTR as saying that the 
USG should take (positive) action towards ratification of the KORUS 
FTA.  According to the source, however, Emanuel, who was absent from 
the meeting, conveyed a message through his aide that the USG should 
be cautious (in moving forward) with the KORUS FTA and, therefore, 
no conclusion was reached in the meeting.  The ROK Embassy in the 
U.S. reported (on the outcome of the meeting) to the Blue House and 
the ROK Foreign Ministry. 
 
The fact that the KORUS FTA was discussed for the first time at the 
Cabinet-level meeting carries great significance in two respects. 
First, this shows that the Obama Administration has begun to 
coordinate the issue (of ratifying the KORUS FTA) at all government 
levels while recognizing the importance of the trade deal.  The 
KORUS FTA had been put on the back burner due to health care reform 
and other issues.  However, it seems that the USG is attaching a new 
importance to this issue.  The Cabinet-level meeting is the second 
highest ranking meetings among the four types of meetings inside the 
White House.  It ranks right below the top-level meeting attended by 
the President and discusses only selected important items. 
Therefore, a diplomatic source said, "The ROK-U.S. FTA, which was as 
good as dead, seems to be reviving." 
 
The (decision to actively discuss the trade agreement)  appears to 
have been affected by the upcoming ROK-U.S. summit on November 19, 
when President Lee Myung-bak is expected to raise the prompt 
approval of the KORUS FTA with President Obama.  An official at the 
ROK Embassy in Washington said, "The Obama Administration or the 
Congress will likely lose the momentum to address the KORUS FTA 
starting next summer, when campaigns for the U.S. mid-term elections 
in November will be in full swing," adding, "The top priority is to 
place the KORUS FTA among Washington's priority issues late this 
year or early next year, when the (debate) about the healthcare 
reform bill is wrapped up." 
 
It is also noteworthy that we have learned about the stumbling block 
inside the Obama Administration.  Observers say that unless Emmanuel 
and the (members of) Congress who are passive about the KORUS FTA 
change their stances, the situation will not get better.  Emmanuel 
reportedly supports a multilateral cooperation regime rather than a 
bilateral agreement, such as the ROK-U.S. FTA.  Emanuel, who was 
elected to Congress representing Chicago in 2002 and forged a 
relationship with then-Senator Obama of the same state, is a 
hard-line politician befitting his nickname "Rambo." There is a 
famous anecdote about him.  Early this year, when a Congressman made 
a phone call to him, he said, "I am too busy to talk," and passed 
the call to President Obama, who was with him.  Emmanuel is 
considered to be the most powerful White House Chief of Staff in 
history. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001768  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
N. KOREA, U.S. ENGAGE IN WAR OF NERVES 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 5, 2009, Page 5) 
 
By Reporter Kim Young-sik 
 
Reprocessing of Spent Fuel Rods vs. Delayed Decision on Bosworth's 
Trip to N. Korea 
 
The U.S. and North Korea are engaging in a tense war of nerves over 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth's visit to Pyongyang.  Despite the (seemingly improved) 
atmosphere for dialogue between the North and the U.S., the North is 
bragging about progress in its nuclear development, and the U.S. is 
delaying a decision on Bosworth's visit to the North. 
 
Most observers say that the conditions now seem to be ripe for 
Bosworth's visit.  An ROKG official said, "So far, the U.S. has 
taken the position that U.S.-North Korea contact is only possible 
when Bosworth is able to meet with North Korea's First Vice Foreign 
Minister Kang Sok-ju or a higher-level official."  On this matter, 
Foreign Policy (magazine) reported on November 3, "The second 
condition put forth by the U.S. was that Ambassador Stephen 
Bosworth, who has been invited repeatedly to Pyongyang, would be 
able to meet with Kang Sok-ju, North Korea's First Vice Foreign 
Minister.  According to the official, the North Koreans also had no 
problem with that."  This means that a primary hurdle has been 
cleared. 
 
The problem is, however, that the USG is concerned about the 
possibility that demonstrable progress will not be made during 
Bosworth's visit.  A diplomatic source explained, "Some officials in 
the Obama Administration are concerned that if a contact with the 
North does not produce results, some conservatives may use it to 
launch a counterattack."  Due to the possibility that Bosworth's 
meeting with North Korea's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang may not 
lead to Pyongyang returning to the Six-Party Talks, the U.S. is not 
able to make a decision on Bosworth's visit. 
 
For the North, since North Korean leader Kim Jong-il already said 
that he would consider rejoining the multilateral talks, depending 
on the outcome of the U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks, 
working-level negotiators find it difficult to change their position 
(regarding the visit.)  The November 2 statement by a North Korean 
Foreign Ministry spokesman - "If the U.S. is not ready to sit down 
face to face with us, we will go our own way" - also seems to be 
designed to urge the U.S. to change its stance. 
 
At present, it is not easy to foresee how the war of nerves between 
the two nations will pan out.  A high-ranking ROKG official noted on 
November 4, "At the moment, the North is focused on a meeting and 
dialogue with the U.S. while the U.S. is expecting to get some 
results (the North's return to the Six-Party Talks) from a meeting 
with the North."  In other words, there is no common ground yet. 
 
Meanwhile, regarding Pyongyang's claim that it has reprocessed 8,000 
spent fuel rods, State Department Spokesman Ian Kelly urged the 
North to refrain from further provocations, saying, "I think 
everybody should be careful and ratchet down the rhetoric and not 
take any actions that would contribute to tension in the region." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>