^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1628  |  2009-10-15  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 15일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001628

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=83531|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 15일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/11 12:34//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 한국일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
임진강 수해방지 오늘 南北 회담; 北, 사과 여부 '주목' 

중앙일보
[[http://www.koreadaily.com/news/read.asp?art_id=923870|대법-헌재, 20년 갈등 폭발…'사법 권력' 충돌]]

동아일보
[헬로! GREEN]年15조원 버릴건가요

한겨레 신문
‘행정도시' 명칭 건설현장서 사라졌다

세계일보
은행 ‘저신용층 지원' 시늉만… 서민대출 ‘인색'

===== 국내 동향 =====

북한은 어제 남북 실무회담에서 북의 갑작스러운 댐 방류로 유발된 순간적인 홍수로 한국 시민 6명이 숨진 것에 대해 "유감"을 표명하고 유가족에게 조의를 표명했다. 한국 정부는 이를 사과로 받아들였다. (전체)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

미국은 13일 북한의 최근 단거리 미사일 발사가 유엔안보리 결의 위반인지 여부에 대한 판단을 유보하였다. 필립 크롤리(Crowley) 국무부 공보담당 차관보도 정례 브리핑에서 북한 미사일 발사에 대한 미국 정부의 입장에 대해 "우리는 6자회담 재개와 북한의 의무사항 이행에 관심이 있다"는 입장만을 반복했다. ([[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/15/2009101500128.html|조선]])

커트 캠벨(Campbell) 국무부 동아태 차관보도 "북한이 6자회담에 분명히 복귀하고 비핵화 약속을 지키겠다는 것을 밝히지 않는 한, 미국은 북한과 직접 대화를 하지 않을 것"이라고 14일 밝혔다. ([[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/15/2009101500128.html|조선]], 세계, KBS)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

보수 조선일보는 내부 지면 보도에서 미국은 북한의 최근 단거리 미사일 실험이 유엔안보리 결의를 위반했는지 판단을 유보했다고 말했다. 조선일보는 미국이 "어떻게 판단할지 검토 중"이며 "유엔 결의 위반 여부는 미사일 사거리 등 특징에 대한 분석을 토대로 판단할 문제"라는 미 국무부 고위 당국자의 발언을 전했다.

조선일보는 또 필립 크롤리(Crowley) 국무부 공보담당 차관보의 언론 발언을 언급했다. 그가 거듭 밝힌 미국의 입장: "우리는 6자회담 재개와 북한의 의무사항 이행에 관심이 있다."

보수 조선일보, 세계일보, 국영 KBS는 커트 캠벨 국무부 동아태 차관보가 베이징에서 "북한이 6자회담에 분명히 복귀하고 비핵화 약속을 지키겠다는 것을 밝히지 않는 한, 미국은 북한과 직접 대화를 하지 않을 것"이라고 밝힌 내용을 전했다.

모든 한국 언론은 북의 갑작스러운 댐 방류로 유발된 순간적인 홍수로 한국 시민 6명이 숨진 것에 대해 북한이 "유감"을 표명하고 유가족에게 조의를 표명했다는 소식을 전면에 할애했다. 한국 정부는 이를 사과로 받아들였다.

신문은 다음과 같은 제하의 기사를 게재했다: <풀려가는 남북관계… '개성·금강산'까지 순항하나> (보수 조선일보); <북한, 진정한 사과일까 고개 숙인 척 한 걸까> (중도우파 [[http://news.joins.com/article/3824793 |중앙일보]]) <최소한 성의만 보인 北… 최대한 해석해준 南> (보수 동아일보); <북, 임진강참사 유감 표명/ 180도 태도 바뀐 北…북미대화 겨냥 '걸림돌' 치우기> (중도 한국일보)

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://www.donga.com/fbin/output?n=200910150069|[사설]30개월 뒤 戰作權돌려받는 ‘그날’ 이후]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 15일, 39면)

2012년 4월 17일 한미연합사령부가 없어지고 전시작전통제권(전작권)을 한국군이 단독 행사하게 된다. 1950년 북한의 6·25 기습 남침 직후 이승만 대통령이 더글러스 맥아더 유엔군사령관에게 작전지휘권을 넘긴 이래 62년 만이다. 6·25전쟁 때 미국을 위시한 16개국이 즉각 유엔군 깃발 아래 전투부대를 보내 함께 피를 흘리지 않았다면 오늘의 자유 대한민국은 없었을 것이다.

지금 우리는 2012년 4월 17일이 불안하다. 한미연합사 해체와 전작권 환수 이후 유사시에 우리 군(軍)이 주도적 역할을 할 수 있을 만큼 충분한 대비 태세를 갖출 수 있을지 의문이다. 우리 눈앞에는 인민들이 굶어죽거나 말거나 핵무기와 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM) 개발에만 혈안이 돼 있는 북이 엄존하고 있다. 아무리 현대화된 무기체계라 해도 북의 핵과 미사일 같은 비대칭(非對稱) 무기에는 대응하기 어렵다. 미국의 정보 자산(資産)과 핵우산 없이는 마음 놓을 수 없는 안보상황인 것이다. 북은 2012년을 ‘강성대국 완성의 해’로 잡고 적화통일 야욕을 한순간도 버리지 않고 있다.

2012년 말 남쪽에선 차기 대통령선거를 치른다. 선거운동 과정에서 혼란과 국론 분열, 갈등이 심화될 우려가 있다. 같은 해 한미연합사 해체와 함께 예정됐던 용산 미군기지 평택 이전도 비용 부담 문제로 2년 이상 늦어질 것으로 전망된다. 노무현 정부가 수립한 ‘국방개혁 2020’에서 연평균 9.9% 증액하기로 했던 국방예산은 내년도 예산안에서 3.8%로 대폭 깎였다. 향후에도 예산 확보가 어려워 전작권 환수에 대비한 방위력 개선 계획은 줄줄이 차질이 예상된다. 첫 번째 이지스함인 세종대왕함은 탑재 미사일을 절반밖에 확보하지 못했다. 수직발사대의 3분의 1 정도에 장착할 요격미사일 SM-6은 아직도 개발 중이다. 대당 1000억 원짜리 최신예 전투기 F-15K를 부속품 부족으로 제대로 운용하지 못하고 있는 것도 그런 사례다.

노 정권이 2007년 2월 한미 국방장관 회담에서 전작권 환수에 최종 합의하면서 그 날짜를 ‘4월 17일’로 잡은 것부터 잘못이다. 6·25전쟁 때 작전지휘권을 넘긴 ‘7월 14일’을 거꾸로 읽어 정한 것인데, 마치 미국의 식민통치로부터 독립이라도 하는 양 떠들어댄 격이다.

전작권은 노 정권의 생각처럼 주권(主權)과 자주(自主)의 문제이기 이전에 우리의 생존이 걸린 문제다. 우리 단독으로 북의 재도발을 막아낼 충분한 능력을 갖춘 뒤 전작권을 돌려받아야 하는 이유가 거기에 있다. 명분과 자존심을 앞세우느라 국가안보를 위험에 빠뜨리는 것은 어리석은 짓이다. 전작권 환수가 30개월 앞으로 다가왔다.

(편집자 주석: 이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

*기사를 작성한 기자는 노무현 정부가 작전통제권 반환 일자를 4월 17일(4/17)로 특정해 선택한 것은 한국 전쟁 발발 이후 작전지휘권을 미국에 넘긴 날인 1950년 7월 14일을(7/14) 거꾸로 읽은 숫자로 상징적인 날짜로 보았기 때문이라고 주장하고 있다.

===== 특집 =====

[[http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/article.aspx?aid=2911264|[영문기사 번역 생략]NASA PREDICTS LINKS WITH KOREA SPACE PROGRAM ]]

[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/14/2009101400108.html|＂달 탐사 등 한국과 협력 우주발사체 분야도 가능＂]](조선일보, 2009년 10월 14일, 8면)

대전 이영완 기자

"한국은 우주개발에서 이미 많은 것을 이뤘다. 앞으로 미국과 유인(有人) 달 탐사 프로젝트와 기후 관측 등 여러 분야에서 미국과 협력할 것이다. 경우에 따라 우주발사체 분야도 협력 대상이 될 수 있다."

미 항공우주국(NASA) 찰스 볼든(Bolden) 국장은 13일 대전국제우주대회에서 열린 기자간담회에서 "한국항공우주연구원(이하 항우연) 방문에서 확인한 한국의 위성기술이 매우 인상적이었다"며 "미 행정부의 우주개발 정책 방향이 결정되면 적극적으로 협력을 추진할 계획"이라고 밝혔다.

―NASA와 한국의 달 탐사 협력방안은.

…"한국은 과학이 매우 발전한 국가이므로 협력이 당연하다. 이미 NASA와 항우연이 상호방문을 통해 구체적인 협력방안을 모색하고 있다."

―어떤 분야에서 협력이 가능한가.

"이번 방문에서 항우연이 그동안 한 일을 확인했다. 오늘 밤 실무적 차원에서 양자 간 협력 협정을 조인할 예정이다. 대표적으로 전 지구적인 기후변화를 관측하는 일을 들 수 있다."

볼든 국장은 12일 오후 항우연 이주진 원장과 지구과학·우주과학·우주탐사·우주통신·항공 등 5개 분야에서 내년부터 24개 협력사업을 추진하기로 합의한 것으로 알려졌다.

―일본은 NASA로부터 기술을 받아 우주발사체를 개발했다. 한국과도 발사체 분야에서 협력할 수 있는가.

"우선 지구관측 같은 과학분야에서 협력을 적극적으로 추진할 것이다. 하지만 행정부의 우주개발 정책이 결정되면 우주발사체 분야의 협력을 모색할 수도 있을 것이다."

―한국이 우주개발 분야에서 발전하기 위해 필요한 것은 무엇일까.

"우주개발에서 지도자의 역할이 매우 중요하다. 어제 이명박 대통령이 우주탐사에 관심을 표명한 것은 한국 우주개발에서 행운이라고 볼 수 있다. 이 대통령이 오바마 대통령과 만난 자리에서 우주개발을 수차례 언급하며 한국이 초보적인 수준이라고 했는데 너무 겸손한 표현이다. 한국은 이미 많은 성과를 보였다. "

볼든 국장은 한국과 인연이 깊다. 그는 "평화와 우주개발을 위해 방문한 것은 이번이 처음이지만 과거 군사적인 이유로 한국에 온 적이 있다"고 말했다. 해병대 소장 출신인 볼든 국장은 10여년 전 포항에서 열린 한미 합동군사훈련에 참가했다고 밝혔다. 

(편집자 주석: 한겨레 신문도 <[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/society/society_general/381681.html|[이사람] “한국과 ‘달 탐사’ 협력 가능할 것”]]>이라는 제목으로 똑 같은 기사를 게재했다. 미 항공우주국 책임자로 좀처럼 외국 행사에 나서지 않는 볼든 국장이 대전에서 열리고 있는 국제우주대회에 전격적으로 참석해 세계 우주산업과 기업, 학자 등 관련자의 주목을 받고 있다. 이번 대회의 참가 규모가 60년 사상 최대이자 최고가 된 점도 그와 함께 참여한 나사의 덕을 봤다는 평가이다. 그는 “나사가 중요하게 생각하는 분야는 환경과 기후변화다. 한국과 협력을 확대할 것이다. 특히 교육문제도 관심이 크다. 현재 KARI에는 없는 항공·우주 교육프로그램을 지원해 학생들의 꿈과 열정을 키웠으면 한다.” 어거스틴 위원회는 록히드 마틴 항공사의 전 경영인(CEO)인 놈 어거스틴이 이끄는 오바마 미국 대통령의 우주 관련 자문단으로, 미국 유인 우주 프로그램의 새로운 가능성을 모색하는 일을 하고 있다.)

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1628.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001628 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 15, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
N. Korea Expresses Regret over Flood Deaths 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Supreme Court, Constitutional Court in Turf War over Constitutional 
Court Law Revision 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Nationwide "Zero Food Waste Campaign" Launched 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
The Title, "Administrative City," Disappears 
from Sejong City Construction Site 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Banks Still "Stingy" with Loans to Low-income Households 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
North Korea expressed "regrets" over the death of six ROK citizens 
in a flash flood caused by its sudden discharge of dam water and 
offered condolences to their bereaved families during yesterday's 
working-level, inter-Korean talks. The ROKG accepted this as an 
apology. (All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
On Oct. 13, the U.S. reserved its judgment on whether North Korea's 
recent short-range-missile tests violated UN Security Council 
resolutions. Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Philip 
Crowley was quoted as reiterating Washington's position during a 
regular briefing that, "We're interested in seeing North Korea 
recommit to its obligations that it's made in the past few years." 
(Chosun) 
 
Kurt Campbell, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and 
Pacific Affairs, meanwhile, said in Beijing yesterday: "The U.S. 
will not entertain direct negotiations between the U.S. and North 
Korea, absent a Six-Party commitment." (Chosun, Segye, KBS) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo ran an inside-page report saying that the 
U.S. has reserved its judgment on whether North Korea's recent 
short-range-missile tests violated UN Security Council resolutions. 
Chosun quoted a senior State Department official as telling 
reporters on Oct. 12 that the USG is still "thinking about the 
matter," adding: "Whether the North violated UNSC resolutions will 
be determined based on an analysis of aspects including how far the 
missiles flew." 
 
The Chosun report also noted press remarks by Assistant Secretary of 
State for Public Affairs Philip Crowley, in which he reiterated 
Washington's position: "We're interested in seeing North Korea 
recommit to its obligations that it's made in the past few years." 
 
Conservative Chosun and Segye Ilbo and state-run KBS quoted Kurt 
Campbell, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific 
Affairs, as saying in Beijing yesterday: "The U.S. will not 
entertain direct negotiations between the U.S. and North Korea, 
absent a Six-Party commitment." 
 
All ROK media gave front-page play to North Korea's expression 
 
SEOUL 00001628  002 OF 004 
 
 
yesterday of "regrets" over the death of six ROK citizens in a flash 
flood caused by its sudden discharge of dam water and the North's 
offer of condolences to their bereaved families.  The ROKG was 
reported as having accepted this as an apology. 
 
Newspapers carried the following headlines: "Thawing Inter-Korean 
Relations... Will the Rest of Issues, Including Kaesong Industrial 
Complex and Mt. Kumgang Tours, be Plain Sailing?" (conservative 
Chosun Ilbo); "Is It Sincere Apology or Pretense?" (right-of-center 
JoongAng Ilbo); "Minimum Sincerity from N. Korea ... Generous 
Interpretation by ROK" (conservative Dong-a Ilbo); and "N. Korea's 
About-Face Aimed at Removing 'Obstacle' to Talks with U.S." 
(moderate Hankook Ilbo) 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
READY TO RETAKE WARTIME CONTROL? 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 15, 2009, page 39) 
 
On April 17, 2012, the ROK will take over wartime operational 
control for the first time in 62 years and the Combined Forces 
Command will disappear.  President Rhee Syng-man gave such control 
to the Commander in Chief of the UN Forces in Korea, Gen.  Douglas 
MacArthur, immediately after North Korea invaded the ROK on June 25, 
1950.  Without the blood of soldiers from 16 countries under the 
U.N. flag, including those from the U.S., the Republic of Korea 
would not be free today. 
 
The problem is the date of the control's handover: April 17, 2012. 
It is doubtful whether ROK forces are sufficiently prepared to take 
the lead in times of war after the Combined Forces Command is 
dissolved.  North Korea cares nothing for its people and is only 
interested in developing intercontinental ballistic missiles.  Even 
with Seoul's modern weapons, they cannot counter Pyongyang's 
"asymmetric arms" such as nuclear weapons or missiles.  Without the 
intelligence and nuclear umbrella of the U.S., the ROK cannot feel 
safe.  North Korea has sets a goal of becoming a militant country by 
2012 and has never given up its desire to communize the Korean 
Peninsula. 
 
The ROK will hold a presidential election at the end of 2012, and 
confusion in the election campaign, conflict and divided opinion is 
likely.  The relocation of the U.S. base in Seoul's Yongsan district 
to Pyeongtaek, Gyeonggi Province, which will occur at the same time 
as the disbanding of the Combined Forces Command, will be delayed 
for more than two years.  The defense budget was supposed to be 
raised 9.9 percent per year in the plan "Defense Reform 2020" set by 
the previous Roh Moo-hyun Administration, but has been cut 3.8 
percent in next year's budget.  Since securing the budget will be 
more difficult, a series of plans to beef up national defense in 
preparation for the return of wartime operational command are 
expected to be interrupted.  The ROK has just half of the needed 
missiles for the Aegis warship Sejong.  The SM-6, which will occupy 
a third of a vertical launch pad, is still under development. 
Cutting-edge F-15K fighter jets that cost 100 billion won (85.9 
million dollars) each are also not fully operational. 
 
It was inappropriate for the Roh Administration, in its bilateral 
defense talks in February 2007, to set the date for change of 
wartime command to April 17 as if the ROK had been liberated from 
U.S. colonial rule.  The ROK handed over operational command to the 
U.S. July 14, 1950, after the Korean War broke out.* 
 
The Roh Administration understood that wartime operational command 
was a matter of survival and even more critical than sovereignty and 
independence.  This is why Seoul must retake the command only after 
it is prepared enough to counter Pyongyang's provocation alone. 
Endangering national security to save face and pride is foolish. 
Just 30 months remain before Seoul takes over wartime command. 
 
(Ed. Note: This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it 
is similar to the Korean version. 
 
SEOUL 00001628  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
*The journalist is saying that the Roh Administration specifically 
chose the date April 17 (4/17) for the proposed return of 
operational control as a symbolic date because it is the numeric 
reverse of the date July 14, 1950 (7/14), when the ROK  turned over 
operational command to the U.S. after the Korean War broke out.) 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
NASA PREDICTS LINKS WITH KOREA SPACE PROGRAM 
(JoongAng Daily, October 14, 2009, page 2) 
 
Yonhap News 
 
DAEJEON - Korea has the potential to become an important partner in 
efforts aimed at advancing exploration and technology for the 
peaceful use of space, the head of the U.S. aerospace administration 
said yesterday. 
 
National Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA) chief Charles 
Bolden, Jr. said at the International Astronautical Congress in 
Daejeon, located 164 kilometers (102 miles) south of Seoul, that the 
country has made noticeable strides with its robust space program by 
building satellites and launching a rocket into orbit. 
 
He said that future cooperative endeavors could take place in such 
areas as lunar exploration, satellites and the field of aeronautics. 
 
 
The remarks come after President Lee Myung-bak said on Monday that 
Seoul is seeking to forge cooperative relations with top space 
exploration leaders like the United States and is considering a move 
to take part in a U.S.-led lunar exploration project. 
 
"NASA is hopeful of enhancing bilateral cooperation that can make 
South Korea a vital partner along with other countries," Bolden told 
reporters. 
 
He did not go into details, but said that new cooperative endeavors 
can be explored in a wide range of promising areas along with 
traditional fields where two-way exchanges have taken place in the 
past. 
 
At present, NASA exchanges data and information on Earth observation 
that is used to monitor climate change and weather conditions. 
 
The former Marine Corps major general said Washington is waiting for 
the release of the so-called Augustine Report, which will highlight 
the need for international cooperation in future space endeavors as 
a way to defray skyrocketing costs and spread out risks. 
 
Bolden said that the United States has held talks on future 
cooperation with "non-traditional space partners" such as Vietnam, 
Malaysia and Thailand to discern the positions of these countries. 
He also stressed that while policy makers in Seoul believe they are 
far behind technologically, there are not many countries that can 
build satellites and launch space vehicles from their own soil. 
 
Bolden was appointed by U.S. President Barack Obama as NASA 
administrator earlier this year. 
 
 
NASA ADMINISTRATOR: "COOPERATION WITH THE ROK COULD TAKE PLACE IN 
LUNAR EXPLORATION, SPACE VEHICLES" 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 14, 2009, Page 8) 
 
By Reporter Lee Young-wan from Daejeon 
 
"The ROK will cooperate with the U.S. in many areas, such as manned 
lunar exploration projects and climate observation.  Cooperation 
could also take place in the field of space vehicles." 
 
 
SEOUL 00001628  004 OF 004 
 
 
National Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA) chief Charles 
Bolden made the statement to reporters at the International 
Astronautical Congress in Daejeon on October 13.  He added, "The 
ROK's satellite technologies, which I saw during a visit to the 
Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI), were very impressive. 
Once the U.S. Administration decides its policy direction on space 
development, we plan to actively push for cooperation (with the 
ROK.)" 
 
Q. How will NASA cooperate with the ROK on the ROK's lunar 
exploration? 
 
"It is natural to cooperate with the ROK because it is a 
scientifically advanced nation.  (Officials at) NASA and KARI are 
already seeking specific ways to cooperate by visiting each other." 
 
Q. In what field is it possible to cooperate? 
 
"During this visit, I checked what KARI has done so far.  An 
agreement of mutual cooperation in such areas as observation of 
global climate change will be signed at the working level tonight." 
 
Mr. Bolden reportedly agreed with KARI President Lee Joo-jin on the 
afternoon of October 12 to push for 24 cooperative projects in five 
fields - earth science, space science, space exploration, space 
communications, and aeronautics - starting next year. 
 
Q. Japan developed its space vehicle with the help of NASA.  Can 
NASA cooperate with the ROK in the field of space vehicles? 
 
"We will first actively push for cooperation in science fields, such 
as earth observation.  However, when the U.S. administration's 
policy on space development is decided upon, we could seek 
cooperation in the space vehicle field." 
 
Q. What is necessary for the ROK to develop in the field of space 
exploration? 
 
"The role of a leader is very important in space exploration.  The 
ROK is fortunate in that President Lee Myung-bak expressed interest 
in space exploration yesterday.  When meeting with President Obama, 
President Lee mentioned space development many times and said that 
the ROK is at an elementary level, but (I believe that) that is too 
modest.  The ROK has already made noticeable strides." 
 
Mr. Bolden has a deep relationship with the ROK.  He said, "When it 
comes to peace and space development, this is my first visit to the 
ROK, but I came to the ROK before for military reasons."  The former 
Marine Corps major general noted that he participated in the 
ROK-U.S. joint military drills in Pohang about a decade ago. 
 
(Editor's Note:  The same story was also carried by Hankyoreh 
Shinmun under the headline of "NASA Hopeful of Cooperating with ROK 
on Lunar Exploration."  The article reports:  "National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration (NASA) chief Charles Bolden, Jr. made a 
rare appearance at the International Astronautical Congress, 
garnering attention from the international space industry, 
businesses and scholars.  This event recorded the largest attendance 
in its sixty-year history apparently due to the involvement of the 
head of the U.S. aerospace administration.  Bolden said that NASA 
puts importance on environment and climate change, adding that the 
Administration will enhance cooperation with the ROK.  He noted that 
NASA has a particular interest in education.  Bolden went on to say 
that NASA will assist the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) 
in developing aeronautics and space educational programs so that 
students can develop their dreams and passions.  The Augustine 
Commission is an advisory committee under U.S. President Obama led 
by Norm Augustine, former CEO of Lockheed Martin Corp.  The 
Commission is exploring new possibilities for U.S 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>