<code>
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUL #1699/01 2990908
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 260908Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY SEOUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6040
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS IMMEDIATE
INFO RUCNKOR/KOREA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG PRIORITY 5212
RUACAAA/COMUSKOREA INTEL SEOUL KOR PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMUSKOREA J5 SEOUL KOR PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMUSFK SEOUL KOR PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI PRIORITY
</code>

====== 제목: 북한 전문가 남주홍 교수, 중국이 북한 붕괴를 용인할 것이라 주장  ======

대외비 SEOUL 001699 
 
SIPDIS 

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 10/26/2029 

TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM SOCI ECON KN KS CH

참 고: A. SHENYANG 183 
B. BEIJING 2872
C. BEIJING 2870 
 
분류자: POL M/C James L. Wayman.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d).




===== 요약 =====

1. (C) 현 한국 정부의 대북정책을 뒷받침하는 학계의 대부격인 남주홍 교수는 북한의 붕괴 국면에서 중국이 한반도 통일을 위한 한국의 노력을 방해하지 않을 것이라고 말했다. 남 교수가 주장하기를, 중국 정부의 고위 당국자들이 중국이 두 번째 한반도 분쟁에 개입하는 것은 베이징의 장기 전략적 이익에 해당하지 않는다고 말했다는 것이다. 남 교수의 말에 따르면, 베이징은 원자바오 총리의 최근 평양 방문이 북한을 6자 회담에 복귀하도록 설득하는데 실패했다고 결론 지었다고 한다. 중국의 외교 정책 전문가들이 점점 더 북한을 중국의 안보 위협으로 바라보고 있다는 것이다.
 남 교수는, 만일 평양에 권력 공백이 발생한다면, 북한 군벌들 사이에 교전이 발생할 수 있으며, 이런 상황은 한국군의 개입을 불러올 수 있다고 주장했다. 이때 한국의 목표는 질서를 확립하고 한국에 우호적인 정권과의 평화적 공존기간 동안 궁극적인 통일의 환경을 성숙시키는데 있을 것이다. 요약 끝. 

2. (C) 첨언: 남 교수가 언급한 중국 측 인사들의 원자바오 총리 방북에 관한 견해는 주한 중국대사관보다 훨씬 비관적이다. 주한 중국대사관은 원자바오 총리의 방북이 6자회담 재개에 있어 결정적인 사건이 될 것이라고 계속해서 강조하고 있다. 또한 우리는, 남 교수가 무시하는 것으로 보이는 부분, 즉 북한 내부에 불안정한 상황이 발생했을 때 중국이 미국과의 군사적 마찰을 감수할 필요 없이 북한에 영향력을 행사할 수 있는 수많은 방법이 있다는 것을 상기할 필요가 있다. 그러나, 그 현실성 여부와는 관계없이, 남주홍 교수의 견해는 북한 내부에 불안정한 상황이 발생하였을 때 한국 정부의 대응을 결정하는 논의 과정에서 커다란 영향력을 끼칠 것이다. 첨언 끝. 


===== 집권당 대북 정책의 권위자 =====

3. (C) 남주홍 박사는 이명박 정부의 대북 정책의 설계자이자 이 대통령의 초대 통일부 장관 내정자였다. 남 박사는 10월 20일 정치담당관과 만나 한국 정부의 북한 붕괴(DPRK ENDGAME) 시나리오들에 관해 논의하였다. 오만하고 사려 깊은 성품의 남 박사는 김영삼 정부 시절 국가안전기획부의 북한 관련 부국장을 지낸 바 있고, 이명박 대통령직 인수위원회에 참여했으며, 인수기간 동안 국가정보원의 임시 수장을 맡은 바 있다. 그는 국가안전기획부에서의 오랜 재임기간 동안 갖가지 사건에서 상대편 북한 인사들과 접촉할 수 있었고, 중국 관리들과 폭넓은 관계를 형성하였다. 남 박사의 저서 “통일은 없다”는 통일은 극히 중요하지만 동시에 매우 벅찬(daunting) 전략적 국가 목표라고 진술하고 있으며, 이것은 보수 집권당의 외교 정책 원리에 있어 매우 중요한 부분이다. 이 책은 통일이 오직 기나긴 노력을 통해서만 달성될 수 있다는 생각을 해체하려 하고 있다. 남 박사는 현재 경기대학교의 정치학 교수로 재직하고 있다. 그는 부동산 투기 혐의와 그의 매파적 관점이 북한을 상대해야 하는 통일부 장관으로서 부적절하다는 언론의 비판으로 인해 통일부 장관 내정자에서 사퇴하였다. 


===== 중국은 북한을 위해 싸우는 것이 가치 없는 일이라는 것을 알고 있다. =====

4. (C) 남 교수는 북한의 존망이 달린 무력 분쟁에 개입하는 방법으로 중국의 전략적 이익을 도모하지 않는다는 것이 베이징의 결론이라고 주장했다. 남 교수는 많은 중국 고위 정보담당자들과의 대화 결과를 토대로, 후-원-쩡 트로이카 리더쉽은 북한 방위를 위해 한미 연합군과의 분쟁에 휘말리는 것이 중국의 장기적 이익에 전혀 도움이 되지 않는다고 결론 지었다는 것에 자신감을 가지고 있었다. 남 교수는 중국이 무슨 이유로 한국, 미국, 일본과의 정치적, 경제적 관계에 대한 장기적 전망을 위험에 빠트리겠는가? 하고 반문하였다. 그는, 다른 표현으로, “완충국 치고는 대가가 너무 비싸다(a buffer state at what cost?)”고 주장하였다. 

5. (C) 남 교수는 베이징의 정치 지도부는 서구 지향적이며, 동북아시아 정치에 대해 실용적인 관점을 가지고 있다고 평했다. 패권을 얻기 위한 중국의 노력에는 한국에 대한 전략도 있는데, 그는 그것을 “도강양행” 혹은 “바다를 건너기 전에 강을 건넌다”는 말로 표현하였다. 남 교수는 이것을 장기적으로 한국과의 관계를 확립하는 것이 경제, 교역에 도움이 될 뿐만 아니라, 한국의 동맹국, 즉 미국과의 관계를 관리하고 확대하는데 용이하기 때문이라고 설명하였다. 


===== 원자바오의 평양 방문: 파열? =====

6. (C) 남 교수는 원자바오 총리의 방북(10월 4일~6일) 직후, 그가 만난 중국측 인사들로부터 총리의 방북이 실패했다는 매우 직설적인 말을 들었다고 한다. 중국 측 인사는 북한이 6자회담 복귀에 동의할 것인가 하는 물음에 대해 자신있는 대답을 내놓지 못했고, 이 문제는 아직까지 평양에서 극심한 논쟁거리라고 말했다. 남주홍의 소식통은 김정일은 원자바오 총리에게 원유, 쌀, 점결탄을 포함한 “전략적 일괄 지원”을 요구하였으나, 6자회담 복귀를 확약 하는 것은 꺼렸다고 밝혔다. 베이징의 지도부는 “평양에 대해 매우 불만스러워 하고 있으며”, 공개적으로 북한을 비난하는 목소리가 터져 나오고 있다. 또한 일부는 북한의 핵이 언젠가 중국을 향할 지도 모른다는 뜻을 비치기도 하였다. 많은 중국 안보 전문가들은 북한을 더 이상 동맹국으로만 생각하는 것이 아니라 중국의 코앞에 위치한 안보 위협으로 여기고 있다는 것이 남 교수의 주장이었다. 


===== 북한 붕괴: 지배권 확보가 우선, 통일은 나중에 =====

7. (C) 북한 붕괴 이후의 시나리오를 논의하던 중에 남 교수는 한국 정부가 북한 영토의 지배권을 확립하는 작업과 실제 통일을 구분하는 것을 주저하지 않았다. 전자는 긴급하고 불가결한 작업인 반면 후자는 장기적 목표라는 것이다. 남주홍은 독일 방식으로 하루아침에 통일하는 것은 남북한 모두에게 “자살 행위” 라는 확고한 믿음을 가지고 있었다. 동서독의 문화적 단절은 매우 미미하였던 반면, 남북한 사이에는 “높고도 두꺼운 장벽”이 존재한다고 그는 말했다. 

8. (C) 남주홍은 북한에 권력 공백 상태가 발생할 경우, 멀리는 일제강점기부터 그 유래를 찾을 수 있는, 북한 군벌들 사이의 무력 충돌이 일어날 가능성이 많다는 믿음을 가지고 있었다. 군벌들 간의 무력 충돌은 질서 유지를 위한 한국 정부의 군사적 개입을 필요로 하는 최악의 “급변” 시나리오를 야기할 수 있다. 비록 그가 자세히 이야기 하지는 않았지만, 질서 회복을 위한 최초 침입으로부터 통일을 향한 움직임에 이르기까지 서울은 우호적인 북한 정권과의 충분한 시간의 평화적 공존을 필요로 할 것이라고 말했다. 

스티븐스




====== 원문 ======

<code>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001699 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/26/2029 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM SOCI ECON KN KS CH
 
SUBJECT: ROK EXPERT CLAIMS CHINA WON'T OBSTRUCT DPRK ENDGAME 
 
REF: A. SHENYANG 183 
     ¶B. BEIJING 2872 
     ¶C. BEIJING 2870 
 
Classified By: POL M/C James L. Wayman.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 

------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) The intellectual godfather of the ROK's current DPRK 
policy, Professor Nam Joo-hong, told us that in the event of 
a DPRK collapse China would not stand in the way of the ROK's 
efforts to unify the Korean Peninsula.  Nam claims senior PRC 
intelligence officials have told him that Chinese 
intervention in a second Korean conflict would not be in 
Beijing's long-term strategic interest.  Beijing had 
concluded that Premier Wen Jiabao's recent Pyongyang visit 
failed to persuade the North to return to Six-Party Talks, 
according to Nam.  Chinese foreign policy experts 
increasingly viewed the DPRK as a threat to China's security. 
 Nam asserted that if a power vacuum were to arise in 
Pyongyang, fighting could erupt between DPRK military 
factions and the ROK army could be forced to intervene.  The 
ROK aim would be to establish order and allow for a period of 
peaceful coexistence with a Seoul-friendly regime to foster 
better conditions for eventual unification.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Comment:  Nam's account of his PRC interlocutors, 
views were significantly more negative on the Wen visit than 
the Chinese embassy here, which continues to portray it as a 
pivotal event that will help get the Six-Party Talks back on 
track.  We also note that in the event of instability in the 
DPRK, there would be numerous ways for China to influence 
events without necessarily engaging in military conflict with 
the United States, a point Nam seems to ignore.  Realistic or 
not, however, in the event of instability in the DPRK, Nam,s 
would be a powerful voice in ROK deliberations over how to 
respond.  End Comment. 

----------------------------------- 
The Ruling Party's DPRK Policy Guru 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Dr. Nam Joo-hong, the architect of the Lee Myung-bak 
administration's North Korea policy and President Lee's first 
nominee to become Unification Minister, met with poloff on 
October 20 to discuss ROKG thinking regarding DPRK endgame 
scenarios.  Arrogant and thoughtful, Nam was a KCIA Deputy 
Director responsible for North Korea during the Kim Young-sam 
administration, a member of LMB's transition team and interim 
head of the ROK National Intelligence Service during the 
transition.  During his lengthy tenure in the KCIA, Nam met 
with DPRK counterparts on many occasions and developed 
extensive contacts with Chinese officials.  Nam's book, 
"There's No Unification," makes the case that unification is 
a critically important but even more daunting strategic 
national goal, and is central to the conservative ruling 
party's foreign policy canon.  The book seeks to dispel 
notions that unification would be anything but a long slog. 
Nam is currently a political science professor at Kyonggi 
University.  He withdrew his nomination for Unification 
Minister in the wake of allegations of improper real estate 
speculation and media criticism that his hawkish views were 
not a good fit for the ministry charged with engaging the 
North. 

--------------------------------------- 
China Knows DPRK Not Worth Fighting For 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Nam asserted Beijing had concluded that its strategic 
interests would not be served by engaging in armed conflict 
over the ultimate fate of North Korea.  As a result of 
extensive dialogue with a range of senior PRC intelligence 
officials, Nam was confident that the Hu-Wen-Zeng leadership 
troika had already decided that coming to North Korea's 
defense in a conflict with U.S.-ROK allied forces would in no 
way serve China's long-term interests.  Why would China put 
at risk its long-term prospects for expanding economic and 
political relations with the ROK, the U.S. and Japan, Nam 
asked.  Or to put it another way, he posited, "a buffer state 
at what cost?" 
 
¶5.  (C) Nam said the political leadership in Beijing was 
Western-oriented and pragmatic in its view of Northeast Asia 
politics.  China's efforts to achieve superpower status 
involved a strategy toward Korea he referred to as "do 
gangyang haeng," or "crossing the river to cross the ocean."Nam 
explained that solid long-term relations with the ROK were 
important to China for economic and trade reasons, but also 
facilitated the greater goal of managing and expanding 
relations with the ROK's treaty ally, the United States. 

------------------------------- 
Wen's Pyongyang Trip:  A Bust? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Nam met with his PRC contacts in Beijing following 
Premier Wen Jiabao's October 4-6 Pyongyang visit and was told 
very bluntly that the trip had failed.  Nam's Chinese 
interlocutors lacked confidence that the North would agree to 
return to the Six-Party Talks and had told him that the 
question was still a subject of intense debate in Pyongyang. 
Nam's sources indicated Kim Jong-il had asked the Premier Wen 
for a "strategic aid package," including crude oil, rice, and 
coking coal, but was unwilling to make a clear commitment to 
return to the Six-Party Talks.  The leadership in Beijing was 
"very unhappy with Pyongyang" and many official PRC voices 
were now openly critical of the regime, some suggesting that 
the North's nuclear capability could one day be directed 
against China.  Many PRC security experts had concluded that 
not only was the DPRK no longer an ally, but now posed a real 
security threat right on China's doorstep, Nam asserted. 

------------------------------------------------- 
DPRK Endgame:  Assert Control First, Unify Later 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶7. (C) In discussing post-DPRK scenarios, Nam was quick to 
draw a distinction between the ROKG tasks of establishing 
control of DPRK territory and actual unification, the former 
being an immediate imperative and the latter a long-term 
goal.  Nam was adamant in his belief that German-style 
overnight unification would be "suicidal" for both halves of 
the Peninsula.  The cultural divide between the two Germanys 
was miniscule, compared to the "high, thick wall" that exists 
between the Koreas, he opined. 
 
¶8. (C) Nam believed that in the case of a leadership vacuum 
in the DPRK, violent clashes could easily emerge between 
military factions that have roots going back as far as the 
Japanese occupation.  Factional violence could constitute a 
worst-case "sudden change" scenario requiring ROK military 
intervention to maintain social order.  Although he did not 
go into detail, Nam suggested that between the time of a 
first ROK incursion to restore order and a move toward 
unification, Seoul would seek an extended period of peaceful 
coexistence with a friendly DPRK regime. 
STEPHENS
</code>
