^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1800 | 2009-11-12 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 12일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001800

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://m.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84096|서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 12일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/04/21 03:42//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
용산역세권 개발부지 땅속 살펴보니… 전체면적 80%에 산업폐기물;중금속·기름오염도 심각… 정화비용 1000억 넘을듯 

중앙일보
법, 이념 앞에서 길을 잃다

동아일보
교전 북 함정 선체 구멍 NLL 넘자마자 예인돼

한국일보, 서울신문
총리실서 대안마련 주도 친박 “자극말자” 휴전제안 

한겨레 신문
친서민정책' 속 쫓겨난 서민 민생입법 '안전망' 구축해야

세계일보
북, '참수리 325호'만 표적 공격

===== 국내 동향 =====

한국 정부는 11일 전날 북한과의 해상 교전 이후 서해에 군사력을 증강하고 해상분계선에 구축함을 파견하였다. (중앙, 서울)

미 백악관의 로버트 기브스(Gibbs) 대변인은 10일 "북한이 서해에서 긴장 고조로 간주될 수 있는 추가적인 행동을 하지 말기 바란다"고 말했다. (조선, 동아)

11일 외교통상부에 따르면 아프가니스탄에 진출한 한국 기업이 최근 현지 무장괴한들에게 세차례 습격을 당한 것으로 밝혀졌다. (동아, 한겨레, 한국, 서울, 세계)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

미국은 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 북한을 방문하기로 했다고 북한에 통보하였다. 이번 방문은 북한의 6자회담 복귀 여부를 논의하기 위함이다. (전체)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 남북 해군 간 교전 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 한국 함정을 공격하게 된 동기에 대한 분석 기사를 실었다. 중도 우파 중앙일보는 북한의 도발 문제를 다룬 내부 지면 보도를 실었다. 중앙은 북한이 승산 없는 전투에서 우리 고속정에 공격을 가했다고 했다. 중앙일보는 북한의 한국의 경고방송을 고의로 무시하고 북한의 사전에 준비된 듯이 선제 사격을 개시했다고 보도했다. 중앙은 북한 측이 큰 피해를 보고도 별 대응이 없었던 점에 [[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3536832|의문을 제기]]했다. 중앙은 또 군사 전문가의 입을 빌어 현 정부의 대북 정책 때문에 남북 충돌이 이뤄졌다는 점을 부각시켜 한반도에 긴장을 고조시키는 제한적인 교전을 도모했을 수 있다고 관측했다. 중앙은 또 미국과의 협상을 앞두고 공갈을 한 측면도 있다는 [[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3536831|전문가의 견해]]도 전했다.

보수 조선일보는 관련 소식으로 미 백악관의 로버트 기브스(Gibbs) 대변인은 10일 "북한이 서해에서 긴장 고조로 간주될 수 있는 추가적인 행동을 하지 말기 바란다"고 말했다고 전했다.

==== 보즈워스의 북한 방문 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 연말에 평양을 방문할 예정이라는 미 국무부의 발표를 보도하였다. 보수 조선일보는 미 국무부의 필립 크롤리(Crowley) 공보담당 차관보가 보즈워스 대표의 방북 결정을 단 3개의 문장으로 발표하면서도 6자회담의 맥락에서 북미 대화가 이뤄진다는 점을 거듭 강조했다고 내부 지면에서 보도하였다. 조선은 오바마 행정부가 북한과의 대화가 '대단한 일'이 아닌 것처럼 포장해서 양자 회담에 앞서 북한의 기(氣)를 꺾으려 한다는 것이라고 했다.

한겨레 신문 사설: "미국은 이번 기회에 지나치게 조심스런 자세에서 벗어나 협상 분위기 조성을 선도할 필요가 있다. …미국 정부 설명대로 이번 방북이 북-미 협상을 위한 것이 아니라 ‘6자회담의 틀 안에서 이뤄지는 대화’라고 하더라도, 양쪽이 협상 상대로 서로를 믿지 못한다면 6자회담은 순조롭게 재개될 수 없다. 따라서 미국은 이번 방북에서 북한이 핵 포기의 길을 갈 수 있도록 자신의 구상을 충분히 밝히고 깊이 있는 대화를 끌어내야 한다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설] 마침내 시작되는 북한 핵 협상**(한겨레 신문, 2009년 11월 12일, 27면)

미국 정부가 그제 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 방북 계획을 공식 발표했다. 지난 8월 초 빌 클린턴 전 대통령이 방북해 북-미 대화 통로를 연 지 3개월여 만이다. 그동안 두 나라는 뉴욕 창구와 리근 북한 외무성 미국국장의 방미 접촉 등을 통해 대화 재개 문제를 협의해 왔다. 이번 보즈워스 대표의 방북 발표는 이런 과정을 통해 북-미 사이에 대화의 의제와 형식 등에 합의가 이뤄졌음을 뜻한다.

미국은 버락 오바마 대통령의 아시아 방문을 앞두고, 그것도 7년여 만에 서해교전이 재발했음에도 보즈워스 대표의 방북 사실을 발표했다. 미국이 지난달 초 원자바오 중국 총리의 방북 이후 방향을 굳힌 ‘대화를 통한 핵 문제 해결 노선’ 쪽으로 한발 더 내디뎠음을 보여준다. 곧, 이번 방북을 기점으로 본격적 협상 국면이 열릴 것임을 예고한다.

미국은 이번 기회에 지나치게 조심스런 자세에서 벗어나 협상 분위기 조성을 선도할 필요가 있다. 본질적으로 북한 핵 문제를 풀 가장 중요한 당사자는 미국과 북한 두 나라임을 부정하기 어렵다. 미국 정부 설명대로 이번 방북이 북-미 협상을 위한 것이 아니라 ‘6자회담의 틀 안에서 이뤄지는 대화’라고 하더라도, 양쪽이 협상 상대로 서로를 믿지 못한다면 6자회담은 순조롭게 재개될 수 없다. 따라서 미국은 이번 방북에서 북한이 핵 포기의 길을 갈 수 있도록 자신의 구상을 충분히 밝히고 깊이 있는 대화를 끌어내야 한다.

북한은 지난 6년 동안 핵 문제 논의를 위한 대화 틀로 자리잡아온 6자회담을 무시하고 미국과의 대화만을 고집해서는 안 된다. 6자회담은 북한이 궁극적으로 바라는 안전보장과 한반도 평화체제 구축, 경제 지원 등의 논의를 진척시킬 최선의 틀이다. 북한이 계속 경직된 모습을 보인다면 어렵게 대북 대화에 나선 오바마 행정부도 나라 안팎에서 역풍을 맞을 수 있다.

우리 정부는 대화를 통한 핵 문제 해결이라는 큰 흐름에 맞서려고 하지 말고 어떻게 하면 주도적 구실을 할 수 있는지 더 치열하게 고민해야 한다. 정부가 서해교전 이후 남북관계가 악화하지 않는 방향으로 대처하기로 한 것은 잘한 일이지만, 이런 소극적인 자세에 머물러선 안 된다. 그 출발점은 남북관계 개선이다. 남북관계 수준과 한반도 관련 사안에 대한 발언권은 함께 갈 수밖에 없기 때문이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

===== 특집 =====
**美, 보즈워스 방북 北에 통보… 5가지 궁금증**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 12일, 5면)

하태원 워싱턴 특파원

보즈워스 방북에 관한 5가지 궁금증

《미국이 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 방북 결정을 북한 측에 공식 통보했다. 필립 크롤리 미 국무부 공보담당 차관보는 10일 “버락 오바마 대통령과 힐러리 클린턴 국무장관은 동맹국 및 파트너들과 신중한 검토와 광범위한 협의를 거쳐, 방북 준비를 했다”고 말했다. 그는 “보즈워스 특별대표가 행정부 관련 부처의 소수 인원으로 구성된 팀을 이끌고 방북할 것”이라고 덧붙였다.》 그는 방북 시기와 관련해 “(아직) 방북 시점은 결정되지 않았다”며 “다만 올해가 가기 전 북-미 대화가 열릴 것으로 예상한다”고 말했다. 크롤리 차관보는 보즈워스 특별대표의 방북 목적과 관련해 “6자회담의 조속한 재개를 촉진하고 북한의 2005년 9·19 공동성명에 대한 이행의지 재확인을 확보하기 위한 것”이라고 설명했다.

보즈워스 특별대표의 공식 파트너는 강석주 외무성 제1부상이다. 강 부상은 2002년 10월 제임스 켈리 전 동아시아태평양 담당 차관보와의 면담에서 2차 북핵 위기의 시작을 알리는 농축우라늄 프로그램 가동을 시인한 후 7년 만에 처음으로 공식 회담 석상에 모습을 드러낸다. 보즈워스 특별대표의 방북은 지난해 8월 크리스토퍼 힐 당시 6자회담 수석대표의 방북 이후 책임 있는 당국자의 첫 공식 방문이다. 5대 쟁점을 짚어 본다.

①방북 시점을 정하지 못한 속내

북한이 이근 미국국장의 방미 기간 중 확실한 6자회담 복귀의 시그널을 주지 않은 탓으로 보인다. 크롤리 차관보는 북한의 6자회담 복귀를 확신하느냐는 질문에 “그렇지 않다”며 “다만 북한이 이번 회담의 목적을 이해하고 있다고 믿는다”고만 답했다. 6자회담 한국 측 대표를 지낸 브루킹스연구소의 박선원 방문연구원은 “보즈워스 특별대표의 방북 결정은 북-미 관계 개선을 위한 능동적인 미국의 판단이라기보다는 유화적으로 나오는 북한에 대한 수동적인 반응에 가깝다”며 “대화의 목표에 대해 여전히 이견이 있음을 보여 주는 것”이라고 말했다.

②보즈워스 보따리에 당근은 있을까

워싱턴의 대체적인 기류는 이번 방북이 협상용이 아니라 북한의 대화 유도가 주요 목적인 만큼 대화 복귀에 대한 인센티브를 제공할 가능성은 낮다는 쪽이다. 크롤리 차관보는 “6자회담 복귀만으로 북한에 보상하지는 않을 것”이라며 “과거 합의사항을 준수하는 북한의 긍정적인 조치를 기대한다”고 말했다. 애틀랜틱카운슬에서 북한 정보 분석담당관을 지낸 스티븐 코스텔로 프로글로벌 대표도 “오바마 대통령이 보즈워스 특별대표에게 협상의 전권을 위임하며 특사 자격을 줄 것으로 보이진 않는다”고 말했다.

북한이 얼마만큼 성의를 보이느냐가 변수라는 지적도 있다. 크롤리 차관보는 “북한이 전향적으로 나올 경우 다른 가능성이 열릴 수 있다”고 말했다.

③2차 북-미 회담 이뤄질까

전문가들은 이번 회담 이후가 문제라고 입을 모은다. 어차피 첫 만남에서 비핵화를 위한 돌파구를 마련할 가능성이 없는 만큼 이른 시기에 미국이나 제3의 장소에서 2차 보즈워스-강석주 회담을 재개하는 게 중요하다는 것. 어차피 한 번에 많은 진전을 이루기 어려운 것이 확실한 현실을 양측이 인정하고 가장 이른 시일 내에 2차 회담을 해야 한다는 것. 이는 북-미 양자가 이번 대화에 얼마나 진지하게 임하느냐를 판단할 수 있는 척도로도 볼 수 있다.

④김정일 국방위원장 면담 이뤄지나

국무부 고위 당국자는 보즈워스 특별대표의 오바마 대통령 친서 전달 여부와 김 위원장 면담 가능성에 대해 “모른다”고만 했다. 전문가들은 보즈워스 특별대표가 협상력을 높이기 위해선 방북 전 오바마 대통령과의 단독 면담을 통해 무게감을 가질 수 있도록 모양새를 취해 줘야 한다고 조언한다. 파트타이머라는 약점을 노출했고 대북정책 수립 과정에서 소외되는 듯한 인상을 줬던 보즈워스 특별대표가 강 부상과 대화를 갖기 위해서는 정치적으로 힘을 실어줄 필요가 있다는 것.

⑤서해교전과 북-미 대화 재개의 함수

클린턴 장관은 11일 서해에서 발생한 남북 간 교전이 보즈워스 특별대표의 방북 결정에 영향을 주지는 않을 것이라고 밝혔다. 클린턴 장관은 이날 싱가포르에서 열린 아시아태평양경제협력체(APEC) 각료회의에 참석해 기자회견을 통해 이같이 밝혔다. 이 같은 발언은 보즈워스 특별대표의 방북이 예정대로 진행될 것이라는 의미로 풀이된다.

**미(美) '보즈워스 방북(訪北)' 단 세문장 브리핑**(조선일보, 2009년 11월 12일, 5면)

이하원 워싱턴 특파원

10일 미국 국무부가 스티븐 보즈워스(Bosworth) 대북정책 특별대표의 방북(訪北) 결정을 발표한 방식은, 북한엔 실망스러운 것이었다. 미 국무부의 필립 크롤리(Crowley) 공보담당 차관보는 정례 브리핑에서 "질문에 앞서 몇 가지 발표할 것이 있다"며, 힐러리 클린턴(Clinton) 국무장관의 일정에 이어 두 번째로 보즈워스 대표의 방북 결정을 언급했다. 크롤리 차관보는 단 3개의 문장에서 세 차례 '6자회담'을 언급하며 미국의 결정을 알린 후, 다음 발표로 넘어갔다.

미국은 통상 '중요한' 결정을 발표할 때는 장관급 인사가 마이크를 잡고 그 옆에 관련 인사가 늘어서는 것이 관례다. 그러나 이날은 달랐다. 지난 2월 오바마 행정부 출범 후 처음으로 북한과 의미 있는 대화를 시작하는 발표장에 힐러리 클린턴(Clinton) 국무장관 장관은커녕, 보즈워스 대표와 성 김(Kim) 대북특사의 얼굴은 보이지 않았다. 크롤리 차관보 옆에는 아무도 없었고, 그는 기자들과의 질문에 '6자회담 맥락(in the context of six party talks)에서의 양자 회담'을 반복해서 강조했다.

이 같은 발표 방식은 2001년 6월 6일 조지 부시(Bush) 당시 대통령이 직접 나서서 북한과의 대화 재개 성명을 발표한 것과는 확연히 대비된다. 부시 대통령은 당시 성명에서 "나는 국가 안보팀에 북한과 광범위한 의제에 대해 진지한 협의를 하도록 지시했다"고 밝혔다. 콜린 파월(Powell) 국무장관은 당시 방미 중이던 한승수 외교부 장관과 회담을 가진 후, 국무부 정문에서 가진 기자회견에서 이에 대한 질문을 직접 받았다.

미 국무부 주변에선 오바마 행정부가 의도적으로 보즈워스 대표의 방북 결정에 무게를 싣지 않고 발표했다는 분석이 나온다. 오바마 행정부가 북한과의 대화가 '대단한 일'이 아닌 것처럼 포장해서 양자 회담에 앞서 북한의 기(氣)를 꺾으려 한다는 것이다. 국무부 대변인이 한 달 넘게 미북 양자 대화에 대한 미국의 결정이 곧 내려질 것이라고 언급하면서, 북한의 진을 뺀 것과 같은 맥락이라는 것이다.

워싱턴의 한 외교소식통은 "오바마 행정부 관계자들은 과거처럼 요란하게 북한과 대화하게 되면, 북한의 기를 살려준다고 생각한다"며 "북한의 입장이 변하지 않는 한, 오바마 행정부는 북한에 대해 차분한 대응을 계속할 것"이라고 말했다.

일각에선 오바마 행정부가 격(格)을 낮춰 보즈워스 대표의 방북 결정을 발표한 배경에는 미북 양자 대화 결과를 낙관하지 못하기 때문이라는 분석도 한다. 회담 결과가 밝지만은 않은 상황에서 굳이 무게를 둬서 발표할 필요는 없다고 판단했다는 것이다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1800.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001800 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 12, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Industrial Wastes Illegally Buried in Yongsan Development District; 
Account For 80% of Total Area 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Court Rulings Contradict Each Other Depending 
on Judges' Ideological Orientation 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Damaged North Korean Ship Is Towed Shortly 
After Crossing Northern Limit Line 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
Officials to Accelerate Sejong Revision; Alternative Plan 
to Be Unveiled in December 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Middle Class-friendly Policies Fail to Protect Middle Class; "Safety 
Net" Should Be Established 
 
Segye Ilbo 
North Korea Targets Only One ROK Vessel 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
Following Tuesday's naval skirmish with North Korea, the ROK 
yesterday beefed up forces in the Yellow Sea and deployed a 
destroyer to waters near the maritime border. (JoongAng, Seoul) 
 
In a related development, White House Spokesman Robert Gibbs said on 
November 10, "I would say to the North Koreans that we hope that 
there will be no further actions in the Yellow Sea that can be seen 
as an escalation." (Chosun, Dong-a) 
 
According to the ROK's Foreign Ministry officials, an ROK company 
operating in Afghanistan has recently been attacked three times by 
the militants. (Dong-a, Hankyoreh, Hankook, Seoul, Segye) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
The U.S. has informed North Korea of its decision to send Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth to discuss 
the regime's possible return to the Six-Party Talks. (All) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-North-South Korea naval clash 
------------------------------ 
Most ROK media carried reports speculating about the motives behind 
North Korea's attack on an ROK vessel.  Right-of-center JoongAng 
Ilbo ran an inside-page report on the North's provocations.  The 
newspaper noted that the North Korean patrol boat attacked the ROK's 
high speed patrol boat even though the North knew that it had little 
chance of winning a fight with the vessel.  The daily also reported 
that it seems that North Korea deliberately ignored the warnings 
from the ROK and opened fire first as a calculated maneuver. 
JoongAng Ilbo questioned the mild nature of the North's response, 
given that it suffered casualties.  The newspaper also speculated, 
citing an ROK military expert, that the North Korean military itself 
may have decided to stage this limited clash to increase tensions on 
the Korean Peninsula by trying to highlight that the ROKG's North 
Korea policy prompted inter-Korean conflicts.  According to the 
newspaper, the expert also views that the North's provocations may 
be a bargaining ploy to increase leverage in negotiations with the 
 
SEOUL 00001800  002 OF 005 
 
 
U.S. 
 
In a related development, Conservative Chosun Ilbo quoted White 
House Spokesman Robert Gibbs as saying on November 10, "I would say 
to the North Koreans that we hope that there will be no further 
actions in the Yellow Sea that can be seen as an escalation." 
 
Bosworth's visit to North Korea 
Most ROK media carried reports on the U.S. State Department's 
announcement that Special Representative for North Korea Policy 
Stephen Bosworth will travel to Pyongyang by the year's end. 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo ran an inside-page report saying that 
Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Philip Crowley 
announced this decision only with three sentences, while repeatedly 
stressing that Ambassador Bosworth's discussions in Pyongyang will 
take place in the context of the Six-Party Talks.  The newspaper 
noted that the State Department intentionally played down the 
decision in order to prevent the North from maneuvering to 
strengthen its bargaining position. 
 
Hankyoreh Shimun editorialized: During Bosworth's visit to North 
Korea, the U.S. should not be overly cautious but instead try to 
create a good atmosphere for negotiations. ... Even though, as the 
USG said, the visit is not for direct talks between the U.S. and 
North Korea but for discussions in the context of the Six-Party 
Talks, the Six-Party Talks will face difficulties if the two sides 
do not trust each other as negotiating partners.  The U.S. should 
lay out its vision on how to get North Korea to give up its nuclear 
ambitions while making efforts to engage in in-depth discussions 
with the North. 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
CONFIRMATION OF BOSWORTH'S NORTH KOREA VISIT PRESENTS CRUCIAL 
OPPORTUNITIES 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, November 12, 2009, Page 27) 
 
On Tuesday, it was officially announced that Stephen Bosworth, the 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy, plans to visit 
North Korea.  This announcement marks three months since former U.S. 
President Bill Clinton visited North Korea and opened a path for 
North Korea-U.S. dialogue.  The two nations discussed the resumption 
of dialogue through the New York channel and during North Korean 
Foreign Ministry U.S. Affairs Bureau Director Ri Gun's visit to the 
U.S.  The announcement of Bosworth's trip indicates that an 
agreement has been made on the agenda and format of the dialogue 
that is to take place between North Korea and the U.S. 
 
The U.S., prior to President Barack Obama's tour of Asia, announced 
Bosworth's trip despite the first inter-Korean naval clash in the 
West Sea in seven years.  This shows that the U.S. has moved a step 
closer, since Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao's visit to North 
Korea early last month, towards a firm position to resolve the 
nuclear issue through dialogue.  As a result, it appears that 
full-scale negotiations will begin during (Bosworth's visit to the 
North.) 
 
During Bosworth's visit to North Korea, the U.S. should not be 
overly cautious but instead try to create a good atmosphere for 
negotiations.  It is hard to deny that fundamentally, the two most 
important actors in resolving the North Korean nuclear issue are the 
U.S. and North Korea.  Even though, as the USG said, the visit is 
not for direct talks between the U.S. and North Korea but for 
discussions in the context of the Six-Party Talks, the Six-Party 
Talks will face difficulties if the two sides do not trust each 
other as negotiating partners.  The U.S. should lay out its vision 
on how to get North Korea to give up its nuclear ambitions while 
making efforts to engage in in-depth discussions with the North. 
 
 
North Korea, for its part, must not engage only in dialogue with the 
U.S. and ignore the Six-Party Talks, which has provided the 
 
SEOUL 00001800  003 OF 005 
 
 
framework for discussing the nuclear issue for the last six years. 
The Six-Party Talks is the most appropriate framework for furthering 
discussion on the economic aid, security guarantees, and the Korean 
peace regime that North Korea hopes for.  If North Korea continues 
to appear rigid, the Obama Administration, which began talks after 
much difficulty, could suffer a backlash. 
 
The South Korean government must stop going against the greater 
trend of resolving the nuclear issue through dialogue and consider 
more intensely what it can do to play a leading role.  It is a good 
thing that the Lee Administration has decided to handle the West Sea 
naval clash in a way that does not aggravate inter-Korean relations, 
but it must not maintain this passive attitude.  The objective is to 
improve inter-Korean ties because the level of inter-Korean 
relations and South Korea's voice on matters pertaining to the 
Korean Peninsula go hand-in-hand. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
BOSWORTH VISITS PYONGYANG, BUT WHEN? 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 12, 2009, Page 5) 
 
By Washington Correspondent Ha Tae-won 
 
Five questions about Bosworth's visit to Pyongyang 
 
The U.S. has notified North Korea of a decision to send U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Stephen Bosworth to Pyongyang. 
Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Philip Crowley said 
on November 10, "President Barack Obama and Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton prepared for (Bosworth's) visit to Pyongyang after 
careful consideration and extensive consultation among our allies 
and partners."  He added, "Ambassador Bosworth... will travel with a 
small interagency team to Pyongyang." Regarding the timing of the 
visit, he said it has not been determined yet, but added that 
U.S.-North Korea dialogue is expected to take place "sometime 
between now and the end of the year."  He explained, "The purpose 
(of Ambassador Bosworth's visit to Pyongyang) will be to facilitate 
an early resumption of the Six-Party Talks and to secure North 
Korea's reaffirmation of the September 2005 joint statement of the 
Six-Party Talks." 
 
Ambassador Bosworth's official North Korean counterpart is First 
Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju.  Kang will make his first 
appearance at an official meeting in seven years after he 
acknowledged the uranium enrichment program in an October 2002 
meeting with then-U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian 
and Pacific Affairs James Kelly, which sparked the second North 
Korean nuclear crisis.  Ambassador Bosworth's visit will become the 
first trip to Pyongyang by a U.S. official in charge (of the nuclear 
issue) since Christopher Hill, then U.S. Chief Negotiator to the 
Six-Party Talks, visited the communist state in August, 2008.  There 
are five points at issue regarding Bosworth's trip to Pyongyang. 
 
Why Did Washington Not Determine the Timing of the Visit Yet? 
The reason seems to be that during Director General of the American 
Affairs Bureau of the North Korean Foreign Ministry Ri Gun's visit 
to the U.S., North Korea did not send a clear signal to Washington 
that it will return to the Six-Party Talks.  When asked if he is 
sure about North Korea's return to the Six-Party Talks, Assistant 
Secretary Crowley answered no, simply saying, "We believe that North 
Korea understands what the purpose of the meeting is."  Park Sun-won 
Park, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution who previously 
served as a member of the ROK delegation at the Six-Party Talks, 
said, "The decision to send Bosworth to Pyongyang cannot be seen as 
Washington's active judgment to improve its relations with North 
Korea but as a passive response to North Korea's conciliatory 
moves," adding, "It indicates that there is still a difference of 
opinion over the goal of dialogue." 
 
SEOUL 00001800  004 OF 005 
 
 
 
Will Bosworth Bring Some "Carrots" with Him? 
The overall atmosphere in Washington is that since the main purpose 
of Bosworth's visit to Pyongyang is not to have negotiations with 
the North but to coax the North back to the table, he will not 
likely provide incentives to the North in return for its returning 
to dialogue.  Assistant Secretary Crowley said, "We are not going to 
reward North Korea simply for returning to the Six-Party Talks.  We 
will be looking to see if they are prepared to take the kinds of 
affirmative steps that they had previously agreed to."  Stephen 
Costello, the president of ProGlobal Inc. who previously directed 
the Program on Korea at the Atlantic Council, noted, "I do not think 
that President Obama will delegate all negotiating authority to 
Ambassador Bosworth and grant him the status of a special envoy." 
 
Some observers say that the issue is how sincere North Korea will 
be.  Assistant Secretary Crowley said, "If North Korea takes the 
kind of steps that they've committed to in the past, other 
possibilities open up." 
 
Will a Second U.S.-North Korea Dialogue Take Place? 
Experts agree that the situation following the upcoming meeting is 
vital.  Since the two nations are not likely to find a breakthrough 
for denuclearization at their first meeting, it is important for 
them to have a second Bosworth-Kang meeting in the U.S. or at a 
third location at an early date.  They should admit that it is 
realistically difficult to achieve much progress in one meeting and 
should meet for the second time as early as possible.  This can 
provide a yardstick for judging how seriously the two sides will 
engage in the upcoming dialogue. 
 
Will Bosworth Meet with North Korean Leader Kim Jong-il? 
Regarding the possibility of Bosworth meeting with North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il or whether Bosworth will deliver President 
Obama's personal letter to North Korean leader Kim, a senior State 
Department official simply said, "I don't know."  In order to 
increase Bosworth's negotiating power, experts advise that the 
President throw his weight behind Bosworth by having an exclusive 
meeting with him before his visit to Pyongyang.  In other words, 
"political weight" should be given to Bosworth for his dialogue with 
North Korea's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju, (to counter 
any appearance) that the "part-time" North Korea envoy has been 
sidelined in the process of setting Washington's North Korea policy. 
 
 
Relations between the Inter-Korean Naval Skirmish and Resumption of 
U.S.-North Korean Dialogue 
Secretary Clinton told a November 11 news conference on the 
sidelines of an APEC meeting that the recent inter-Korean skirmish 
in the West Sea will not have an impact on the decision to send 
Ambassador Bosworth to Pyongyang.  This statement suggests that 
Ambassador Bosworth's visit to the North will proceed as planned. 
 
 
THE U.S.'S THREE-SENTENCE BRIEFING ON BOSWORTH'S VISIT TO PYONGYANG 
(Chosun Ilbo, November 12, 2009, Page 5) 
 
By Washington Correspondent Lee Ha-won 
 
The way that the U.S. Department of State announced a decision to 
send U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth to North Korea was disappointing for Pyongyang.  During a 
November 10 regular briefing, Assistant Secretary of State for 
Public Affairs Philip Crowley said, "I've got several announcements 
before taking your questions" and mentioned Secretary Hillary 
Clinton's itinerary.  After that, he announced Bosworth's visit 
while mentioning the "Six-Party Talks" three times in only three 
sentences. 
 
When Washington announces an "important" decision, it is customary 
for a Secretary-level official to stand in front of a microphone 
with other officials at his side.  On November 10, however, that was 
not the case.  Neither Secretary Clinton nor Ambassador Bosworth nor 
Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks Sung Kim showed up when the 
 
SEOUL 00001800  005 OF 005 
 
 
announcement was made on the first significant dialogue with North 
Korea since the launch of the Obama Administration in February.  No 
one was seen beside Assistant Secretary Crowley, and he repeatedly 
stressed "bilateral dialogue in the context of the Six-Party Talks" 
in response to questions from reporters. 
 
This manner of announcing the decision contrasts sharply with the 
(more formal) statement issued by then-President George W. Bush on 
the resumption of dialogue with North Korea on June 6, 2001.  At 
that time, President Bush personally said, "I have directed my 
national security team to undertake serious discussions with North 
Korea on a broad agenda."  After meeting with visiting ROK Foreign 
Minister Han Seung-soo, then-Secretary of State Colin Powell took 
reporters' questions (about dialogue with North Korea) in person at 
the front gate of the Department of State. 
 
Some observers in the State Department say that the Obama 
Administration intentionally did not give weight to its announcement 
that Ambassador Bosworth will visit North Korea.  The U.S. played 
down its talks with North Korea to prevent the North from 
maneuvering to strengthen its bargaining position.  The U.S. has 
been saying for more than one month that it will decide soon on 
sending Ambassador Bosworth to North Korea for one-on-one talks with 
Pyongyang. 
 
A diplomatic source in Washington said that Obama Administration 
officials think that if the U.S. makes a fuss over holding talks 
with North Korea, it would only give North Korea more room to 
maneuver.  The officials say that unless North Korea changes its 
attitude, the Obama Administration will continue to respond to the 
North in a calm manner. 
 
Some observers also believe that the Obama Administration played 
down its decision to send Ambassador Bosworth to Pyongyang because 
it is not optimistic about the outcome of U.S.-North Korea bilateral 
talks.  The observers claim that since the prospect of the talks may 
not be so bright, the USG did not need to attach importance to the 
announcement. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>