^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL872  |  2009-06-02 07:10  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도 2009년 6월 2일 ======
미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 000872

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도 2009년 6월 2일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2015/08/14 09:40//

===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
북, ICBM급 미사일 3∼4기 제작

중앙일보, 모든 텔레비전
GM대우, 시보레·뷰익 포함 뉴GM의 소형차 생산 맡는다

동아일보
북 '김정운이 후계' 5월28일 해외공관 통보

한국일보
북, 억류 유씨 평양으로 압송

한겨레 신문
"노 전 대통령, 돈문제 대신 인정하려 했다"

세계일보
북, ICBM 동창리 이동 후 행적 묘연

서울신문
북 서해 전투태세 강화

===== 국내 동향 =====

이명박 대통령과 동남아국가연합 지도자들은 오늘 북한의 핵 실험은 세계 평화와 안정을 위협하는 도발적인 행위라고 비판하는 언론발표문을 채택했다고 이동관 청와대 대변인은 전했다. 이틀 동안 제주에서 열린 한-아세안 특별정상회의는 오늘 폐막한다. (모든 매체)

이 대통령은 어제 격주 라디오 연설에서 “북한이 대화와 평화의 길을 외면하고 군사적 위협과 도발을 감행한다면 대한민국은 이를 결코 용납하지 않을 것”이라고 말했다. (모든 매체)

스튜어트 레비(Levey) 재무부 테러금융정보 담당 차관이 미국 대표단의 일원으로 오늘 서울을 방문한다. 레비 차관이 2006년 북한 자산 동결에 핵심적인 역할을 수행한 점을 고려할 때 그가 미국 대표단에 포함된 것은 미국이 대북 금융 제재에 대해 관련 국가와 상의하겠다는 신호를 보내는 것일 수도 있다. (조선, 중앙)

===== 국제 동향 =====

북한이 지난해 말까지 3~4기의 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM)급 장거리 미사일 또는 로켓을 제작한 것으로 1일 알려졌다. 이에 따라 북한은 지난달 발사된 장거리 로켓과 최근 평안북도 철산군 동창리 시험장으로 옮겨진 미사일을 제외하고도 1~2기의 장거리 미사일을 더 보유하고 있을 가능성이 큰 것으로 알려졌다. (조선)

최근 북한군은 남포 서해함대사령부 예하부대 소속 경비정을 비롯한 해안포 부대에 실탄과 포탄을 평시보다 배 이상 비축할 것을 지시한 것으로 알려졌다. 또 서해 남포 인근 초도에서는 합동 사격훈련이 강화됐으며 고속상륙정을 이용한 상륙훈련도 실시하고 있는 것으로 전해졌다. 이러한 북한의 움직임은 한국과의 무력 충돌 가능성을 대비하려는 것일 수도 있다. (조선, 중앙, 한국, 한겨레, 세계, 서울, 모든 텔레비전)

북한 지도자 김정일이 그의 셋째 아들 김정운(정은)을 후계자로 낙점했다고 북한 문제에 정통한 소식통은 전했다. 전문가들은 북한의 최근 도발은 북한 군부와의 단합된 모습을 과시하려는 시도로 판단된다. 북한 군부의 지지는 원활한 권력 이양에 필수적이다. (동아, 한국)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

최근 북한군은 남포 서해함대사령부 예하부대 소속 경비정을 비롯한 해안포 부대에 실탄과 포탄을 평시보다 배 이상 비축할 것을 지시한 것으로 알려졌다. 또 서해 남포 인근 초도에서는 합동 사격훈련이 강화됐으며 고속상륙정을 이용한 상륙훈련도 실시하고 있는 것으로 한국 정부 소식통은 전했다.

대다수 언론은 6월 중 상륙 훈련은 전례가 없었다며 이러한 북한의 동향은 한국과의 무력 충돌 가능성을 대비하려는 것일 수도 있다고 풀이했다.

보수 조선일보는 1면 보도에서 한국 정부 소식통을 거론하며 북한이 지난해 말까지 3~4기의 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM)급 장거리 미사일 또는 로켓을 제작한 것으로 보도했다. 이를 두고 조선일보는 북한은 지난달 발사된 장거리 로켓과 최근 평안북도 철산군 동창리 시험장으로 옮겨진 미사일을 제외하고도 1~2기의 장거리 미사일을 더 보유하고 있을 가능성이 있다고 의미를 부여했다.

한국의 모든 미디어는 6월 1일 청와대 이동관 대변인의 브리핑에 관심을 보였다. 이 대변인은 이명박 대통령과 동남아국가연합 지도자들은 오늘 북한의 핵 실험은 세계 평화와 안정을 위협하는 도발적인 행위라고 비판하는 언론발표문을 채택했다고 전했다. 이틀 동안 제주에서 열린 한-아세안 특별정상회의는 오늘 폐막한다.

이 대통령은 어제 격주 라디오 연설에서 “북한이 대화와 평화의 길을 외면하고 군사적 위협과 도발을 감행한다면 대한민국은 이를 결코 용납하지 않을 것”이라고 말했다고 널리 인용되었다.

조선일보는 스튜어트 레비(Levey) 재무부 테러금융정보 담당 차관이 미국 대표단의 일원으로 오늘 서울을 방문한다며 그가 2006년 북한 자산 동결에 핵심적인 역할을 수행한 점을 고려할 때 그가 미국 대표단에 포함된 것은 미국이 대북 금융 제재에 대해 관련 국가와 상의하겠다는 의사를 표출한 것이라는 기사를 실었다.

관련한 소식으로 중도 한국일보 사설: "북한에 대한 강력한 금융제재가 실현된다면 과거 방코델타아시아(BDA)의 북한예금 동결조치에 비춰 북한에 주는 충격이 막대할 것이다. 유엔 등의 국제무대에서 북한을 감쌌던 중국 러시아도 예정된 북한과의 인적 교류를 취소하는 등 압박을 가하고 있으니 북한의 고립은 한층 심해질 수밖에 없다. 정부는 국제사회의 움직임에 보조를 맞춰 북한의 추가 도발을 효과적으로 제어할 수 있는 틀을 만들어 내는 데 주도적 역할을 해야 한다."

보수 동아일보와 중도 한국일보는 북한 지도자 김정일이 그의 셋째 아들은 김정운(정은)을 승계자로 내정하고 북한 해외 공관에 이 소식을 통보했다고 한국 정부 정보 당국과 북한 문제에 정통한 소식통을 거론하며 보도했다.

특히 동아일보는 1면 보도에서 김정은 내정 소식이 5월 25일 핵 실험 직후인 5월 28일 이뤄졌다고 주장했다. 동아일보는 북한의 최근 도발과 승계자 문제를 연계하며 북한의 최근 도발은 원활한 권력 이양에 필수적인 북한 군부와 단합된 모습을 과시하려는 시도라고 전문가와 소식통을 인용하였다.

==== GM 파산 ====

한국 미디어는 미국의 거대 자동차 업체 제너럴 모터스(GM)가 어제 파산 보호 신청을 했다는 소식을 내부 지면을 할애해 스트레이트 기사로 보도했다. 해당 기사는 GM이 72% 지분을 보유하고 있는 GM 대우의 미래에 초점을 맞추었다.

대다수 미디어는 GM 대우가 "뉴 GM"에 편입되어 시보레, 뷰익과 캐딜락를 비롯한 GM의 블루칩 자산으로 출범할 것으로 기대된다. 보수 조선일보는 GM 대우가 "뉴 GM"으로 흡수될 경우 GM 대우의 생산량은 당분간 큰 폭으로 하락할 공산이 크다고 언급했다. 왜냐면 GM 딜러가 제고 정리에 나섬에 따라 소비자가 GM 자동차를 구매하지 않게 되고 따라서 GM 대우가 생산한 자동자 주문이 하락하기 때문이다.

===== 사설/논단 =====

**北核제재 주저하는 中의 복잡한 셈법**
(동아일보, 2009년 6월 2일 30면)

구자룡 베이징 특파원

북한의 2차 핵실험과 미사일 발사를 둘러싸고 중국의 움직임에 세계가 주목하고 있다. 국제사회는 북한의 유일한 동맹국인 중국이 제재에 적극 동참하지 않으면 북한의 핵 야욕을 꺾을 수 없을 것으로 보고 있다. 중국은 북한의 과격행동을 우려하면서도 강경한 제재를 주저하고 있는 상황이다. 여기에는 중국의 복잡한 계산이 깔려있다는 게 전문가들의 이야기다.

북한 최고위 지도부 동향에 밝은 베이징(北京)의 한 전문가는 “김정일 위원장은 미국과 중국이 동북아에서 세력 다툼을 벌이는 현재 신냉전구도를 교묘히 이용하려 한다”며 “중국으로서는 북한이 미국과 손잡을까 봐 두려워하는 측면도 있다”고 전했다. 지난해 중국은 북한 대외 무역의 무려 73%를 차지했다. 언뜻 보기에는 중국이 북한을 좌지우지할 수 있을 것 같지만 현실은 간단하지 않다. 북한 체제가 붕괴돼 많은 난민이 중국으로 쏟아져 들어오거나 아니면 한반도에서 분쟁이 일어날 때 1차 피해자가 될 수 있다. 중국이 우려하는 상황이다. 중국이 ‘막가는’ 북한을 괘씸하게 생각하면서도 선뜻 독자 제재는 물론 국제사회의 제재에 적극 동참하지 못하고 속병을 앓는 것은 바로 이런 이유 때문이다.

이미 북한과 중국의 관계는 예전 같지 않다. 김 위원장은 올 4월 위성 발사 후 중국이 유엔 안보리에서 ‘의장 성명’ 형태로라도 서방과 보조를 같이한 것에 불만스러워한다. 특히 2차 핵실험 후 공식 반대성명을 낸 중국의 태도에 배신감을 느끼고 있다. 앞서 소개한 대북 전문가는 “만약 중국이 서방과 손을 잡고 압박수위를 높이면서 최악의 경우 국경 봉쇄 등에 나서면 북한은 사실상 미국에 투항하는 수준으로 중국에서 이탈할 수도 있다”고 북한 내 분위기를 전했다.

북한은 중국과는 거리를 두면서 미국과 직접 접촉해 체제안전을 보장받고 원조를 제공받는 등 ‘안보와 경제’의 실리를 챙기려 들 수 있다는 것이다. 미국도 북한이 어느 시점에서 핵무장 철회 및 비핵화 수순을 다시 밟으면서 협상을 요청해 오면 이를 거부할 이유가 없다. 

한반도에서 미국의 영향력이 더 커질 수 있다. 중국으로서는 악몽이다.

하지만 북한이 핵실험에 이어 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM) 발사, 한반도에서의 국지 도발 등으로 ‘과속’하면 국제사회의 제재는 물론 미국과의 협상도 불가능할 것이다. 진정한 대국은 평화를 이끌어가는 능력이 있어야 한다. 중국은 평화를 위한 대의를 지키는 길이 어떤 것인지 이번 기회를 통해 보여줘야 한다.

**[사설] 국제공조 더 절실해진 한반도 위기(한국일보, 2009년 6월 2일 35면)**

한반도 위기지수가 가파르게 치솟고 있다. 북한은 2차 핵실험을 강행한 지 1주일 만에 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM)로 추정되는 장거리 미사일 발사 움직임을 구체화하고 있다. 지난 주에는 우리 정부의 대량살상무기확산 방지구상(PSI) 전면가입에 반발, 군사적 타격 위협과 함께 서해5도 선박 안전운항을 보장하지 못한다고 으름장을 놓았다. 서해교전과 같은 국지적 군사충돌 위험도 배제할 수 없는 상황이다.

전세계를 상대로 한 북한의 도발적 행동은 우리는 물론 미국을 중심으로 한 국제사회의 강력한 응징과 압박을 피하기 어렵다. 로버트 게이츠 미 국방장관은 "북한이 아시아나 미국을 표적으로 파괴능력을 키우는 것을 지켜보고만 있지 않을 것"이라고 경고했다. 2차 북핵 실험 이후 미국의 가장 엄중한 경고인 이 발언은 미국 조야에서 높아지고 있는 군사적 대응 목소리와도 맥이 닿아 있다는 점에서 흘려 들을 수 없다.

유엔안보리도 강도 높은 추가 제재 결의안을 논의 중이다. 여기에는 금융제재방안도 포함될 가능성이 높다고 한다. 북한 핵실험에 공동 대응하기 위해 한 일 중 러 순방에 나선 미국 정부합동대표단에 재무부 차관보가 낀 것도 이와 무관치 않아 보인다.

북한에 대한 강력한 금융제재가 실현된다면 과거 방코델타아시아(BDA)의 북한예금 동결조치에 비춰 북한에 주는 충격이 막대할 것이다. 유엔 등의 국제무대에서 북한을 감쌌던 중국 러시아도 예정된 북한과의 인적 교류를 취소하는 등 압박을 가하고 있으니 북한의 고립은 한층 심해질 수밖에 없다.

정부는 국제사회의 움직임에 보조를 맞춰 북한의 추가 도발을 효과적으로 제어할 수 있는 틀을 만들어 내는 데 주도적 역할을 해야 한다. 다만 압박만 가한다고 해서 문제가 풀리지 않는다는 데 어려움이 있다. 이런 점에서 이명박 대통령이 어제 라디오 주례 연설을 통해 북한에 강력한 경고를 발하면서도 대화를 거듭 촉구한 것은 바람직했다. 북한의 위협에 단호하고 철저한 대비태세를 갖추는 것 못지않게 대화와 협상의 노력을 포기하지 않고 계속해 나가는 것이 중요하다.

===== 특집 =====

**北, ICBM(대륙간탄도미사일)급 미사일 3~4기 제작; 서해 해군·해안포 탄약 2배 증강… 기습 상륙훈련도**

유용원 기자

북한이 지난해 말까지 3~4기의 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM)급 장거리 미사일 또는 로켓을 제작한 것으로 1일 알려졌다. 이에 따라 북한은 지난달 발사된 장거리 로켓과 최근 평안북도 철산군 동창리 시험장으로 옮겨진 미사일을 제외하고도 1~2기의 장거리 미사일을 더 보유하고 있을 가능성이 큰 것으로 알려졌다. 이런 가운데 북한은 최근 서해 일대 해군에 실탄 및 포탄을 평시보다 2배 이상 비축할 것을 지시하고 이례적인 기습 상륙훈련까지 실시하는 등 다양한 도발 준비 징후를 보이고 있는 것으로 전해졌다.

정부 소식통은 "해외에서의 미사일 부품조달 규모 등 여러 정황을 종합해볼 때 북한이 평양시 산음동 병기연구소에서 총 3~4기의 장거리 미사일 및 로켓을 만들었을 가능성이 커 한미 정보 당국이 정밀 추적 중"이라고 했다. 정보 당국은 북한이 최근 동창리 시험장으로 옮긴 장거리 미사일을 발사한 뒤에도 이들 미사일로 추가 발사를 시도할 가능성이 있다고 보고 있다.

또 다른 소식통은 "북한군이 최근 남포 서해함대사령부 예하부대 소속 경비정 등 함정들과 해안포 부대에 실탄과 포탄을 평시보다 2배 이상 비축할 것을 지시한 것으로 안다"고 전했다. 이는 무력충돌 가능성에 대비, 전투력을 보강하기 위한 조치로 풀이된다.

북한은 또 서해안에서 '공방급(級)' 고속 공기부양상륙정 등을 동원한 기습 상륙훈련을 실시 중인 것으로 전해졌다. 북한이 6월 중 상륙훈련을 실시하는 것은 이례적인 일로 일종의 무력시위로 분석된다. 사태가 악화될 경우 백령도·연평도 등 서해 5개 도서에 기습상륙 도발을 할 수도 있다는 것을 우리측에 보여주기 위한 것이라는 분석이다.

…서해 함대사령부 예하 8전대의 전진기지가 있는 남포 인근 초도에서는 합동 사격훈련이 실시되고 있으며, 지난달 말 북한군 수뇌부가 서해 함대 사령부 예하부대를 방문한 것으로 파악됐다고 소식통은 전했다.

군 당국은 이런 움직임이 북한의 무력도발이 임박했다는 결정적인 징후로 판단하지는 않지만 도발로 이어질 수 있다는 판단 아래 예의주시하고 있다.

(우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 일부 수정을 가했다.)

**미 대표단 ‘동쪽’으로 온 까닭은 …(중앙일보 2009년 6월 2일 2면)**

김동호 특파원

북한의 핵·미사일 문제 해결을 위해 일본을 방문한 미국 정부 대표단이 1일 긴박한 하루를 보냈다. 아침부터 일본 외무성 고위 간부들과 실무회의를 한 데 이어 오후에는 나카소네 히로후미(中曾根弘文) 외상, 아소 다로(麻生太郞) 총리와 잇따라 만나 대책을 논의했다. 2일부터는 한국·중국·러시아를 단숨에 순방하는 강행군을 한다. 한국에는 2일 방문해 3일까지 머물며 유명환 외교통상부 장관, 김성환 청와대 외교안보수석 등을 만난다. 

제임스 스타인버그 국무부 부장관이 이끄는 대표단은 ‘대북 포괄 전략’의 기초를 다지기 위해 순방 중이라고 지지(時事)통신 등이 보도했다. 유엔 안전보장이사회 제재 결의를 도출하는 것은 물론 북핵 위협에 따른 동아시아의 동요 조짐을 차단하는 것도 포함돼 있다는 것이다. 익명을 요구한 한국 외교 소식통은 “미국 정부 대표단은 군사적 방어·금융통제·정보 등 세 가지 부문에 걸쳐 포괄적 대응을 위해 동아시아를 순방하는 것”이라고 분석했다. 요미우리(讀賣)신문은 “미국은 김정일 국방위원장의 건강 이상으로 야기된 북한 내 권력 구조 변화가 북한의 ‘핵 보유국’ 이행을 가속화하는 원인으로 본다”고 전했다.

북한이 대외 협상용이 아닌 체제 단속용으로 북핵 실험에 나선 만큼 북한의 행동을 막는 것은 어려워졌다고 미국이 판단하고 있는 것으로 보인다. 이에 따라 미국이 6자회담 참여국들과 총체적 대응책을 마련하기 위해 긴급 순방에 나선 것으로 분석되고 있다.

특히 미국 대표단에 스튜어트 레비 재무부 차관이 동행한 점이 눈길을 끈다. 레비 차관은 2005년 부시 행정부 시절 마카오의 방코델타아시아(BDA)를 ‘불법 자금 세탁 대상’으로 지정하고 북한의 ‘통치 자금’을 옥죄었던 핵심 인사다. 그로 인해 당시 BDA에 있던 북한 자금 2500만 달러가 묶였다. 이 때문에 이번에 미국 대표단이 주요국과 협의하는 대북 압박 수단에 금융 제재와 같은 돈줄 죄기가 포함될 것이란 전망이 나온다. 외교부 당국자는 “미 재무부는 북한의 핵·미사일과 관련된 돈줄을 통제할 수 있는 곳”이라며 “우리는 핵무기나 미사일을 개발하는 자금원·물자를 엄격히 통제하는 것을 지지하는 입장”이라고 밝혔다.

이와 함께 미국 대표단은 북핵으로 불안해하는 한·일 양국에 확실한 안전을 보장하는 동시에 단결된 대응을 요청할 것으로 전망되고 있다. 한·일 양국에서 거론되는 핵 무장론을 차단하려는 의도도 있다. 미국은 특히 일본의 반응을 주시하고 있다. 오키나와 가데나(嘉手納) 공군기지에 최신예 전투기 F-22 랩터 12대를 긴급 배치한 것도 일본의 불안을 잠재우기 위한 조치로 보인다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL872.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 000872 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; June 2, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
¶N. Korea Manufactures Three to Four ICBM-Class Missiles 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, All TVs 
GM Daewoo Likely to be in "New GM" 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
On May 28, N. Korea Informed Overseas Embassies 
of Nomination of Leader Kim Jong-il's Third Son, Jong-un, 
as Kim's Successor 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
¶N. Korea Transfers ROK Worker, Who Has Been Detained at Kaesong 
Industrial Complex, to Pyongyang 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Moon Jae-in, Former Chief of Staff to Late President Roh Moo-hyun: 
"President Roh Tried to Admit, In Place of His Wife, Receiving Money 
from Taekwang Industrial CEO" 
 
Segye Ilbo 
¶N. Korea's ICBM Disappears from View after Being Moved to 
Dongchang-ri Launch Pad on West Coast; Possibility Raised that This 
May be Part of N. Korea's "Harassing Tactics" 
Aimed at U.S. and ROK 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
¶N. Korea Strengthens Combat Readiness along West Coast 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to Blue House Spokesman Lee Dong-kwan, President Lee 
Myung-bak and leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) will adopt a press statement today condemning North Korea's 
nuclear test as a provocative act that threatens world peace and 
stability. The two-day ASEAN-Korea Commemorative Summit on Jeju 
Island comes to an end today. (All) 
 
President Lee also warned in yesterday's biweekly radio address that 
if (North Korea) refuses to take the path to dialogue and peace, and 
goes ahead with military threats and provocations, the ROK will by 
no means tolerate it. (All) 
 
Stuart Levey, Under Secretary of Treasury for Terrorism and 
Financial Intelligence, will be part of a U.S. delegation visiting 
Seoul today. Given that he played a key role in freezing North 
Korean assets in 2006, his inclusion in the delegation may signal 
Washington's intention to discuss financial sanctions against North 
Korea with relevant countries. (Chosun, JoongAng) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS 
------------------------- 
 
According to an ROKG source, North Korea appears likely to have 
manufactured three to four intercontinental ballistic missile 
(ICBM)-class long-range missiles or rockets by the end of last year. 
This means that North Korea may have one or two more long-range 
missiles, in addition to the missile it recently moved to 
Dongchang-ri, a newly constructed launch pad on the North's west 
coast. (Chosun) 
 
According to another ROKG source, North Korea recently ordered its 
forces on the west coast to increase their ammunition reserves to 
twice their peacetime levels. The North is also conducting 
amphibious attack exercises near the western sea border, using 
high-speed landing vessels. These moves might be intended to prepare 
 
SEOUL 00000872  002 OF 006 
 
 
for a possible armed clash (with the ROK.) (Chosun, JoongAng, 
Hankook, Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul, all TVs) 
 
According to a source privy to North Korean affairs, North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il has tapped third son, Jong-un, as his successor. 
Experts saw the North's recent provocations as an attempt to show 
solidarity with the military, whose support is essential for the 
smooth transfer of power in Pyongyang. (Dong-a, Hankook) 
 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
--------------- 
 
-North Korea 
------------ 
Citing an ROKG source, most ROK media carried front-and inside-page 
reports that North Korea recently ordered its forces on the west 
coast to increase their ammunition reserves to twice their peacetime 
levels.  The North is also conducting amphibious attack exercises 
near the western sea border, using high-speed landing vessels, 
according to media reports. 
 
Most media, noting that a landing exercise during the month of June 
was unprecedented in North Korea, interpreted these moves as 
intended to prepare for a possible armed clash (with the ROK.) 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo front-paged a report citing an ROKG source 
saying that North Korea appears likely to have manufactured three to 
four intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)-class long-range 
missiles or rockets by the end of last year.  This means that North 
Korea may have one or two more long-range missiles, in addition to 
the missile the North recently moved to Dongchang-ri, a newly 
constructed launch pad on the North's west coast, according to the 
Chosun report. 
 
All ROK media gave attention to Blue House Spokesman Lee Dong-kwan's 
June 1 press briefing, in which he said that President Lee Myung-bak 
and leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
will adopt a press statement today condemning North Korea's nuclear 
test as a provocative act that threatens world peace and stability. 
The two-day ASEAN-Korea Commemorative Summit on Jeju Island comes to 
an end today, according to media reports. 
 
President Lee Myung-bak was widely quoted during yesterday's 
biweekly radio address: "If (North Korea) refuses to take the path 
to dialogue and peace, and goes ahead with military threats and 
provocations, the ROK will by no means tolerate it." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo featured an article noting that Stuart 
Levey, Under Secretary of Treasury for Terrorism and Financial 
Intelligence, will be part of a U.S. interagency delegation visiting 
Seoul today.  Given that he played a key role in freezing North 
Korean assets in 2006, the report went on to say that his inclusion 
in the delegation may signal Washington's intention to discuss 
financial sanctions against North Korea with relevant countries, 
especially China. 
 
In a related development, moderate Hankook Ilbo editorialized: "If 
strong financial sanctions are imposed on North Korea, they will 
have an enormous impact on the North, as a freeze of North Korean 
accounts in Macau-based Banco Delta Asia (BDA) did in the past. 
Since China and Russia, which have been on North Korea's side on the 
global stage, including UN, are pressuring the North by canceling 
their planned personal exchanges with the North, Pyongyang's 
isolation will only deepen further.  The ROKG should play a leading 
role in global efforts to devise a framework for effectively curbing 
North Korea's additional provocations." 
 
Citing ROKG intelligence authorities and a source privy to North 
Korean affairs, conservative Dong-a Ilbo and moderate Hankook Ilbo 
carried front-page reports that North Korean leader Kim Jong-il has 
tapped third son, Jong-un, as his successor and informed the North's 
overseas embassies of the nomination. 
 
SEOUL 00000872  003 OF 006 
 
 
 
In particular, Dong-a Ilbo's front-page claimed that the 
notification was made on May 28, shortly after the North's nuclear 
test on May 25.  Citing experts and sources, Dong-a linked the 
North's recent provocations to the issue of succession, saying that 
the provocations were intended to show solidarity with the military, 
whose support is essential for the smooth transfer of power in 
Pyongyang. 
 
-GM Bankruptcy 
-------------- 
The ROK media gave straight, inside-page play to U.S. auto giant 
General Motors (GM)'s filing for bankruptcy protection yesterday, 
focusing coverage on the future of GM Daewoo, of which GM owns a 72 
percent stake. 
 
Most media expected GM Daewoo to be included in a "new GM" to be 
built from GM's blue-chip assets, including Chevrolet, Buick and 
Cadillac.  Conservative Chosun Ilbo commented that even if GM Daewoo 
is absorbed into a "new GM," GM Daewoo's production will likely 
decline significantly for the time being because consumers will not 
buy GM cars and, as GM dealers try to reduce backlogs, orders for 
new GM Daewoo-produced cars will fall. 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
REASONS WHY CHINA HESITATES TO IMPOSE SANCTIONS ON NORTH KOREA 
 
(Dong-a Ilbo, June 2, 2009, Page 30) 
 
By Beijing Correspondent Koo Ja-ryong 
 
The world's eye is set on China's (next) move regarding North 
Korea's second nuclear test and missile launches.  The international 
community believes that unless China, North Korea's only ally, takes 
an active part in (imposing) sanctions, North Korea will not be 
discouraged from pursuing nuclear ambitions.  While concerned about 
North Korea's radical behavior, China is reluctant (to impose) 
strong sanctions.  Experts say that (there are complicated reasons 
why China is reluctant to impose such sanctions.) 
 
An expert in Beijing, who is well informed about the leadership in 
North Korea , said, "Chairman Kim Jong-il is trying to take 
advantage of a new Cold-war structure in which the U.S. and China 
are jockeying for power in Northeast Asia," adding, "China is afraid 
that the North may 'join hands' with the U.S."  Last year, North 
Korea's trade with China accounted for 73 percent of North Korea's 
total external trade.  On the surface, China appears to have North 
Korea at its beck and call, but the reality is not that simple.  A 
collapse of the North Korean regime could send a flood of refugees 
into China and, if any conflicts take place on the Korean Peninsula, 
China could become the first victim.  These are matters of concern 
to Beijing.  This is why China is not willing to join in 
international sanctions, not to mention pursuing its own sanctions, 
although it considers an "unruly" North Korea to be impertinent. 
 
North Korea-China relations have already changed.  Chairman Kim is 
not pleased that China agreed to the UN Security Council's 
presidential statement condemning North Korea's satellite launch in 
April.  In particular, the North felt betrayed by China which said, 
in its official statement, that it was resolutely opposed to North 
Korea's second nuclear test.  The expert in Beijing noted, "If China 
joins the West in increasing pressure on the North and even, in the 
worst- case scenario, blocks the border with the North, North Korea 
may break with China and 'surrender' to the U.S." 
 
In other words, Pyongyang could try to pocket some benefits, such as 
a U.S. assurance of regime security and economic aid, by directly 
contacting Washington while keeping its distance from Beijing.  If 
the North disposes of its nuclear weapons and again takes steps 
toward denuclearization at some point in the future and demands 
negotiations with the U.S., the U.S. will have no reason to refuse 
 
SEOUL 00000872  004 OF 006 
 
 
(to engage in the negotiations with North Korea.)  Therefore, the 
U.S. influence over the Korean Peninsula may increase further.  This 
would be a nightmare for China. 
 
However, if Pyongyang goes further and fires an intercontinental 
ballistic missile, following the recent nuclear test, or stages a 
local provocation on the Korean Peninsula, it will not able to avoid 
international sanctions and negotiations with the U.S. will also be 
impossible.  A true superpower would have the ability to advance 
peace.  China should use the current situation as an opportunity to 
show (the world) the way to protect peace. 
 
 
KOREAN PENINSULA CRISIS WARRANTS CLOSER INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
(Hankook Ilbo, June 2, 2009, Page 35) 
 
The crisis is rapidly deepening on the Korean Peninsula.  Only after 
a week following its second nuclear test, North Korea is preparing 
to launch a long-range missile presumed to be an Intercontinental 
Ballistic Missile (ICBM).  Last week, North Korea threatened a 
military strike in protest against the ROKG's full participation in 
the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI).  Also, North Korea 
warned that it can no longer guarantee the safety of (ROK and U.S.) 
vessels in the waters west of the peninsula.  We are in a situation 
where we may face military skirmishes such as the clashes (that 
occurred) off the west coast (in 2002). 
 
North Korea's provocations against the entire world will not likely 
be spared harsh punishment and pressures from the international 
community.  U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates warned that "the 
U.S. will not stand idly by as North Korea builds the capability to 
wreak destruction" on Asia or the U.S.  This warning, the sternest 
one since North Korea's second nuclear, is noteworthy because there 
are growing voices in U.S. political circles calling for the U.S. to 
respond militarily (to North Korea's provocations). 
 
The UN Security Council is discussing a resolution further 
sanctioning North Korea.  Purportedly, there is a high possibility 
that the resolution will include financial sanctions.  This seems to 
be why the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury has joined the USG 
delegation in a trip to the ROK, Japan, China and Russia, which is 
aimed at jointly coping with North Korea's nuclear test.  If strong 
financial sanctions are imposed on North Korea, they will have an 
enormous impact on the North, as a freeze of North Korean accounts 
in Macau-based Banco Delta Asia (BDA) did in the past.  Since China 
and Russia, which have been on North Korea's side on the global 
stage, including at the UN, are pressuring the North by canceling 
their planned personal exchanges with the North, Pyongyang's 
isolation will only deepen further. 
 
The ROKG should play a leading role in global efforts to devise a 
framework for effectively curbing North Korea's additional 
provocations.  However, the problem lies in the fact that pressure 
is not a cure-all.  In this sense, it was desirable that during his 
weekly radio address, President Lee Myung-bak urged the North to 
return to dialogue while sending a strong warning to the North. 
Seeking dialogue and negotiations with North Korea is as important 
as preparing for the North's threats in a stern and thorough manner. 
 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
 
¶N. KOREAN NAVY 'STEPS UP WEST SEA ACTIVITIES' 
(Chosun Ilbo, June 2, 2009, Front page) 
 
By reporter Yu Yong-won 
 
North Korea appears likely to have manufactured three to four 
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)-class long-range missiles 
or rockets by the end of last year.  This means that North Korea may 
have one or two more long-range missiles, in addition to the missile 
 
SEOUL 00000872  005 OF 006 
 
 
the North recently moved to Dongchang-ri, a newly constructed launch 
pad on the North's west coast.   North Korea has apparently 
instructed naval troops in the Yellow Sea to stockpile more than 
twice the normal amount of ammunition and artillery shells and has 
staged an unprecedented surprise landing exercise. 
 
An ROKG official said that, given overall circumstances such as 
North Korea's procurement of missile parts from overseas, there is a 
high possibility that North Korea manufactured three to four 
long-range missiles and rockets at a military research center in 
Sanumdong near Pyongyang.  The official added that the ROK and the 
U.S. are tracking this (information).  The intelligence authorities 
believe that North Korea might attempt to fire these additional 
missiles even after launching the long-range missile it recently 
moved to Dongchang-ri. 
 
Another ROK military source said the North Korean military has 
recently instructed patrol boats and coast artillery batteries under 
the West Sea Fleet Command in Nampo to stockpile more than double 
the amount of ammunition and shells they keep in normal times. That 
could be preparation for a possible clash with the ROK. 
 
The surprise landing exercise on the west coast involved high-speed 
hover-craft landing craft.  The same source said that a landing 
exercise during the month of June was unprecedented in North Korea. 
"The exercise seems to be a kind of saber-rattling," he said.  He 
suggested that the North is attempting to show the ROK that it could 
carry out a provocation by a surprise landing. 
 
Joint shooting training has been conducted near Nampo where the base 
camp of subordinate units under the West Sea Fleet Command is 
located.  According to a source, last month, North Korean military 
leadership visited the subordinate units under the West Sea Fleet 
Command. 
 
But ROK military authorities do not necessarily treat the moves as 
decisive signs that an armed provocation is imminent, though they 
are watching developments closely. 
 
(We have compared the English version on the website with the Korean 
version and made some changes to make them identical.) 
 
 
U.S. DELEGATION VISITING ROK, CHINA, JAPAN AND RUSSIA 
(JoongAng Ilbo, June 2, 2009, Page 2) 
 
By Correspondent Kim Dong-ho 
 
The U.S. delegation kept itself busy on June 1 during its visit to 
Japan to address the North Korean nuclear and missile issue.  The 
U.S. delegation held working-level talks with high-ranking Japanese 
officials in the morning and had a series of meetings with Foreign 
Minister Hirofumi Nakasone and Prime Minister Taro Aso in the 
afternoon in order to discuss ways to respond to (North Korea's 
military provocations).  The group will visit the ROK, China and 
Russia in a tight schedule, starting June 2.  It will arrive in 
Seoul on June 2 and stay until June 3.  The group will meet with 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan, and Senior Presidential Secretary 
for Diplomacy and National Security Kim Sung-hwan. 
 
The Japanese Jiji press reported that the U.S. delegation led by 
Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg is on a tour to lay the 
groundwork for "a comprehensive North Korea strategy."  The visit by 
the U.S. officials is also intended to (elicit consensus) on the UN 
Security Council's resolution sanctioning North Korea and ward off 
signs of disturbance in East Asia triggered by North Korea's nuclear 
threat.  An ROK diplomatic source, who asked not to be named, 
analyzed that the U.S. delegation is on a trip to East Asia to come 
up with a comprehensive response regarding military defense, 
financial control and intelligence.  According to the Japanese 
Yomiuri shimbun, the U.S. is of the opinion that, due to the change 
in the power structure in North Korea resulting from leader Kim 
Jong-il's ill health, North Korea will continue its nuclear program. 
  It appears that the U.S. believes that it may be difficult to stop 
 
SEOUL 00000872  006 OF 006 
 
 
North Korea's provocations because its nuclear test was intended to 
sustain its regime rather than enhance its negotiating power. 
Accordingly, it is analyzed that the U.S. set out on an emergency 
tour to lay out overall countermeasures together with Six-Party 
Talks participants. 
 
In particular, the fact that (Stuart) Levey, the U.S. Treasury 
Department's Undersecretary for Terrorism and Financial 
Intelligence, is part of the U.S. delegation is noteworthy. 
Undersecretary Levey played a key role in freezing about $25 million 
of North Korean assets at the Banco Delta Asia (BDA) Bank in Macao 
during the Bush Administration in 2005.  At that time, the U.S. 
Treasury Department found the BDA to be a primary money laundering 
concern.  Therefore, the U.S. delegation may consider freezing North 
Korean accounts through financial sanctions as countermeasures 
against North Korea.  An ROK diplomatic official said that the U.S. 
Treasury Department can freeze North Korean accounts relating to its 
nuclear and missile (programs).  The ROK diplomatic official also 
added that the ROK supports the strict control of money and 
resources used to develop the North's nuclear weapons and missiles. 
 
 
In addition, the U.S. delegation is expected to provide definitive 
guarantees of security to the ROK and Japan which are feeling uneasy 
due to North Korea's nuclear test, while at the same time calling 
for a united response.  The group's visit is also apparently 
intended to put an end to arguments for nuclear armament surfacing 
in both countries.  The U.S. is closely watching Japan's reaction. 
Apparently in an effort to quell Japan's anxiety, the U.S. deployed 
12 state-of-the-art fighter F-22's to Kadena Air Base in Okinawa. 
 
 
STEPHENS
</file>