^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1582  |  2009-10-05  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 5일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001582

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[https://www.evernote.com/shard/s258/sh/6f50e507-2c3c-4ab4-a0f6-740217daf855/6fb59f6f79ba0110f7b91b96a14dcf56|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 5일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/01 09:54//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
북 ‘6자 복귀’ 전환점 되나

중앙일보, 모든 텔레비전
“한반도에 중대 공헌할 것”

동아일보
북 컨테이너 4개 압수

한국일보, 한겨레신문, 세계일보
원자바오 방북…김정일, 공항 영접

서울신문
단체장 67% “시군구 통합 찬성”

===== 국내 동향 =====

국가정보원과 해양경찰청이 지난달 한국 영해에서 북한 컨테이너 4개를 압수한 것으로(한국 정부 소식통) 알려졌다. 이번 조치는 5월 25일 북한의 2차 핵실험 이후 유엔 안전보장이사회가 채택한 대북 제재 결의에 따라 한국이 북한 화물을 검색하고 유통을 차단한 첫 사례로 기록될 것으로 전망된다. (동아)

정부는 지난 1일 동해에서 배를 타고 남측으로 내려온 북한 주민 11명 전원이 귀순 의사를 피력했다고 4일 밝혔다. 그러나 북측은 전원 송환할 것을 두 차례나 촉구하였다. (전체)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

중국 원자바오 총리가 사흘 일정으로 북한을 방문했다. 김정일 위원장은 평양공항에서 원자바오 총리를 영접했다. 이러한 김 위원장의 흔치 않은 제스처로 인해 북핵 문제의 돌파구에 대한 기대가 커지고 있다. (전체)

김영일 북한 내각 총리가 비핵화(핵문제) 논의를 위한 양·다자 협상에 나설 수 있다고 4일 방북한 원자바오(溫家寶) 중국 총리에게 밝혔다. (전체)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

중국 원자바오 총리가 사흘 일정으로 북한을 방문했다는 소식이 오늘 언론의 크큰 주목을 받았다. 원자바오 총리의 방북은 중국 총리로서는 18년 만에 첫 방문이라고 언론은 전했다. 언론은 또 김정일 위원장은 평양공항에서 원자바오 총리를 영접했다며 이러한 김 위원장의 흔치 않은 제스처로 인해 북핵 문제의 돌파구에 대한 기대가 커지고 있다고 전했다.

원 총리는 평양 도착 직후 서면 성명에서 "중국은 한반도 평화와 안정을 위해 중대한 공헌을 할 것"이라고 밝혔다고 널리 소개되었다.

대다수 언론은 김영일 북한 내각 총리가 원자바오 총리와의 회동 석상에서 한 발언을 언급하였다.

"비핵화(핵문제) 논의를 위한 다자 또는 양자 회담에 참여할 의향이 있다."

전문가들은 최소 수억달러 규모의 석유·식량 지원과 함께 양국 간 각종 합작 프로젝트 논의가 있을 것으로 보고 있다고 보수 조선일보는 전했다. 조선은 다음과 같이 첨언하였다. "그 대가로 중국이 원하는 것은 '북한의 6자회담 복귀'이다. 6자회담은 중국이 북핵 문제에 대한 주도권을 잃지 않으면서 한반도 안정을 꾀할 수 있는 최고의 카드이다."

신문은 다음과 같은 제목의 전면과 내부 지면 기사를 실었다: <北 '6자 복귀' 전환점 되나 원자바오 中총리 '경제선물'들고 訪北… 김정일, 이례적 공항 영접 김영일＂양자·다자협상 가능＂ > (보수 조선일보); <김정일 공항 영접, 수십만 연도 환호 중국 무상원조 겨냥한 파격 예우> (중도 우파 중앙일보); <中원자바오 총리 방북/ 北, 중국에 6자회담 관련 '선물' 안길까> (중도 한국일보); <중 원자바오 총리 방북/한반도 정세 ‘북핵 폐기' 협상국면으로 성큼> (좌파 성향 한겨레신문)

보수 조선일보 [[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/04/2009100400628.html|오늘자 사설]]: "중국은 북핵에 반대한다면서도 결정적인 순간마다 북한에 대규모 원조를 제공해 북 체제의 숨통을 터줘왔다. …원자바오 총리가 이번 회담에서 김 위원장에게 "북핵 폐기 외에 길이 없다"는 경고를 분명히 하지 않으면 중국의 본심이 무엇인지에 대한 국제사회의 의구심은 더욱 커질 수밖에 없다."

보수 동아일보 사설 주장: "김 위원장이 원 총리를 이례적으로 환대한 것을 보면 중국의 위신을 고려해 핵문제에 대해 진전된 발언을 할 가능성이 있다. …김 위원장은 중국이 일관되게 한반도 비핵화를 지지해왔다는 점을 각별히 유념해야 한다. 중국은 수십만 명의 주민이 동원된 대대적인 총리 방문 환영보다는 북한의 6자회담 복귀 선언을 더 듣고 싶어 할 것이다."

토요판 또 다른 사설에서 동아의 주장: "북에 영향력이 큰 중국이 협조하지 않는다면 국제사회의 북핵 폐기 공조가 실효를 거두기 어렵다. 중국의 대북 지원은 어떤 경우에도 국제 공조를 유지하면서 북의 핵 폐기를 실질적으로 유도하는 데 도움이 되는 방향으로 이뤄져야 한다."

<wrap hi>보수 동아일보 오늘자 전면 보도에서 정부 소식통을 인용해 국가정보원과 해양경찰청이 지난달 한국 영해에서 북한 컨테이너 4개를 압수한 것으로 알려졌다고 보도했다.</wrap> 동아는 이번 조치는 5월 25일 북한의 2차 핵실험 이후 유엔 안전보장이사회가 채택한 대북 제재 결의에 따라 한국이 북한 화물을 검색하고 유통을 차단한 첫 사례로 기록될 것으로 전망된다고 언급했다.<WRAP center round info 90%>//**미국의 정보와 지령에 따라 北화물 압수한 국정원과 해경**//
정부 관계자는 “아직 외부에 구체적으로 공개할 단계는 아니지만 지난달 북한과 관련된 컨테이너를 확보한 것은 맞다”고 확인했다. 정부는 이번 사안의 민감성을 감안해 극도의 보안을 유지하고 있다. 정부 당국자들은 어떤 경위로 북한 화물을 압수했는지, 해당 컨테이너에 무엇이 들어 있었는지, 선박의 목적지가 어디였는지 등 세부 사안에 대해 답변을 거부하고 있다. [[http://news.donga.com/3/all/20091005/8847192/1|[단독]北 컨테이너 4개 압수]] //동아일보// <q>(비밀) 10월 23일 도로시 델라한티 정치·군사 부서장은 MSC 라첼레 호에서 압수한 북한 화물 관련 정보에 관한 참조전문 외교 문서를 전달하기 위하여 구현모 외교통상부 군축비확산과장과 회동하였다. 구현모는 한국유엔대표부로부터 이미 똑같은 요지를 전달받았다고 말하였다. 구현모는 압수물 정보의 출처가 미국이란 사실을 공개하지 않겠다고 약속했고 아울러 유엔안보리 산하 1718위원회에(일명 대북제재위원회)에 해당 정보가 전달될 때 “비밀” 표식을 해서 정보의 비밀 유지를 엄수하겠다고 약속했다.</q> [[09seoul1689|제 목: 유엔안보리 결의안 1874호 외교문서 전달: MSC 라첼레 호에서 압수한 북한 화물 관련 정보]] //美대사관 비밀(2급) 전문//
</WRAP>


===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/04/2009100400628.html|[사설] 원자바오·김정일 회담을 주목한다]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 5일 27일)

원자바오 중국 총리가 4일 사흘 일정으로 북한을 방문했다. 김정일 위원장은 평양공항에서 원자바오 총리를 영접했다. 중국 총리의 방북은 대외적으로는 양국 수교 60주년 행사를 위한 것이지만 실제로는 김정일·원자바오 회담을 통해 북핵 문제에 대한 하나의 전환이 이뤄질 것으로 보인다. 현재 북·중 사이 움직임을 둘러싸고 김정일의 '중대발표설'까지 흘러나오고 있다.

김 위원장은 지난달 후진타오 주석의 특사로 방북했던 다이빙궈 외교담당 국무위원에게 북핵 '다자회담'에 참여할 뜻을 밝혔었다. 따라서 이번 원자바오 총리와의 회담에선 일단 김 위원장이 참여하겠다는 '다자회담'이 어떤 것인지에 대한 윤곽이 드러날 가능성이 높다.

김 위원장이 북핵 6자회담 복귀가 아니라 굳이 다자회담이라는 용어를 사용한 것을 보면 북한은 어떤 형태로든 6자회담의 틀에 대한 변경을 시도하고 있는 듯하다. 일각에선 김 위원장이 미·북·중 3국 협상을 제안할 것이라는 관측도 나오고 있다. 실제 회담은 미·북이 하고 우리를 포함한 다른 4개국은 참관인처럼 되는 방식에 대한 추측도 나오고 있다.

어떤 것이든 G20 정상회의까지 개최하는 대한민국이 우리 운명이 걸린 북핵 협상 테이블에서 배제된다는 것은 있을 수 없는 일이다. 중국은 그동안 변함없이 6자회담을 지지해왔다. 지금의 한반도와 국제정세에서는 6자회담이 그나마 최선의 방안이라는 데 거의 이견이 없다. 원자바오 총리의 방북은 북한의 6자회담 복귀로 이어져야 한다. 만약 김 위원장이 추상적이나마 한반도 비핵화 뜻을 밝히고 6자회담으로 돌아온다면 

북핵 협상은 전기(轉機)를 맞게 될 것이다. 그러나 이런 전기는 그동안에도 한두 번 있었던 것이 아니다. 그 전기들이 북핵 폐기가 아니라 북한의 시간끌기만 도와준 것도 사실이다. 북한이 6자회담으로 돌아온다 해도 북한이 핵을 폐기하는 결단을 내릴 것인지에 대한 전망은 여전히 어둡다. 북한은 최근 한·미가 제안한 북핵 일괄타결론을 일단 거부하고 나왔다. 또다시 지루한 협상이 시작될 것이라는 예고처럼 들린다. 여기서 다시 기약없는 협상이 이어진다는 것은 북핵 폐기가 사실상 물 건너갈 위험에 빠지는 것이라고 해도 과언이 아니다.

지금의 북핵 문제는 중국의 문제라 불러도 지나치지 않을 것이다. 만약 중국이 북핵 불용(不容)을 최우선 원칙으로 세우고 북한에 단호하게 대처했다면 북핵이라는 악몽은 생겨나지도 않았을지 모른다. 중국은 북핵에 반대한다면서도 결정적인 순간마다 북한에 대규모 원조를 제공해 북 체제의 숨통을 터줘왔다. 이번에도 원자바오 총리는 북한에 대규모 원조 보따리를 들고 갔다고 한다. 북한이 그 보답으로 6자회담에 나오는 것이라면 핵 폐기 의지는 없이 그저 상황만 모면하는 게 될 수밖에 없을 것이다.

원자바오 총리가 이번 회담에서 김 위원장에게 "북핵 폐기 외에 길이 없다"는 경고를 분명히 하지 않으면 중국의 본심이 무엇인지에 대한 국제사회의 의구심은 더욱 커질 수밖에 없다. 중국의 본심에 따라 최대 피해국인 우리와 다른 주변국들의 대응도 완전히 달라지게 될 것이다. 

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://news.donga.com/List/3/70/20091005/8847117/1|[사설]북핵 뒤의 보트피플, 셋에 하나 굶주리는 주민들]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 5일, 31면)

원자바오 중국 총리가 어제 2박 3일 일정으로 북한 방문을 시작했다. 양국 수교 60주년을 맞아 18년 만에 성사된 중국 총리의 방북이라는 의미가 있지만 우리의 관심은 북핵문제에 미칠 영향에 모아진다. 김정일 북한 국방위원장이 국제사회의 6자회담 복귀 요구에 어떤 대답을 내놓느냐에 따라 북핵의 앞날은 확연하게 달라진다. 원 총리의 방북에 이어 10일 베이징에서 한중일 정상회의가 열린다. 북한이 변하면 3국 정상의 대북(對北)전략도 달라지게 된다. 북한이 도발을 포기하고 대화에 나설 의사가 있다면 놓쳐서는 안 될 기회가 왔다고도 할 수 있다.

김 위원장은 어제 평양공항에 나가 원 총리를 맞았다. 북한 중앙방송은 원 총리가 “비행장과 평양시내 수십 리 연도에서 각 계층 군중들의 열렬한 환영을 받았다”고 보도했다.

김 위원장이 원 총리를 이례적으로 환대한 것을 보면 중국의 위신을 고려해 핵문제에 대해 진전된 발언을 할 가능성이 있다. 원 총리는 도착 성명에서 “중국은 한반도 평화와 안정을 위해 중대한 공헌을 하겠다”고 밝혔다. 김 위원장은 중국이 일관되게 한반도 비핵화를 지지해왔다는 점을 각별히 유념해야 한다. 중국은 수십만 명의 주민이 동원된 대대적인 총리 방문 환영보다는 북한의 6자회담 복귀 선언을 더 듣고 싶어 할 것이다. 

북한은 지금 여유를 부릴 상황이 아니다. 북한 주민 11명이 1일 작은 고깃배를 타고 남한에 귀순했다. 남쪽 동포들이 가족과 함께 고향으로 향할 때 북한 주민들은 죽음을 무릅쓰고 거친 바다로 나섰다. 반기문 유엔 사무총장은 같은 날 “2400만 북한 인구의 3분의 1 이상이 식량난으로 굶주림의 고통에 시달리고 있다”는 보고서를 유엔총회에 제출했다. 이에 앞서 유엔 세계식량계획(WFP)과 식량농업기구(FAO)도 공동보고서에서 올해 북한 주민 900만 명이 기근에 시달릴 것이라고 경고한 바 있다. 오죽하면 장재언 조선적십자회 중앙위원장이 지난달 26일 금강산 이산가족 상봉장에서 “남에서도 상응하는 호의를 표하는 게 어떻겠느냐”며 넌지시 식량 지원을 요청했겠는가. 

북한은 2차 핵실험까지 했지만 얻은 것은 국제 제재와 악화된 식량난뿐이다. 남한에서 좌파정권이 집권하는 동안 쌀과 비료 지원으로 근근이 버텼지만 이제 한계에 도달해 있다. 북한이 핵을 포기하지 않으면 주민들의 굶주림은 계속되고 탈북 행렬은 더 길어질 것이다. 끝까지 “(주민들이) 장군님의 안녕을 비는 마음으로 추석 달구경을 했다”는 선전공세로 주민들을 속일 수는 없다. 우리 정부도 선박 등을 이용한 북한 주민의 대량 탈북사태에 대비한 정교한 종합대책을 시급히 마련해야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://www.donga.com/fbin/output?n=200910020070|[사설]北은 ‘국제 제의’ 화답하고, 中은 ‘국제 공조’ 우선해야]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 2일, 23면)

북한 조선중앙통신은 지난달 30일 우리 정부의 ‘그랜드 바겐’ 제의에 대해 “우리가 그 누구와 관계정상화를 하고 경제적 지원이나 받으려고 그 따위 얼빠진 제안을 받아들일 수 있다고 생각하는 것은 오산”이라며 일축했다. 심지어 박길연 외무성 부상은 지난달 28일 유엔총회 기조연설에서 “핵무기를 보유하고 있는 동안 핵무기의 관리와 사용, 전파(확산) 방지와 핵군축 문제에서 책임적으로 행동할 것”이라고 말했다. 북이 핵 폐기는 고사하고 이젠 노골적으로 핵보유국 행세를 하고 나섰다. 

이틀 뒤면 노무현 전 대통령과 북의 김정일 국방위원장이 정상회담을 갖고 이른바 ‘10·4 정상선언’을 발표한 지 2주년이 된다. 이 선언에는 남북경협을 비롯해 우리가 부담해야 할 짐이 산더미처럼 담겨 있다. 소요 비용만도 14조3000여억 원으로 추산된다. 남한 경제의 36분의 1 수준에 불과한 북의 경제 규모를 고려한다면 그야말로 돈벼락을 떨어뜨리는 것이다. 임기 종료 4개월여를 앞두고 차기 정권에 엄청난 부담을 떠안긴 선언이다. 민족의 재앙이 될 수도 있는 북핵에 대해선 한마디 언급조차 없고 우리에게 일방적 부담만 안긴 이런 선언을 차기 정부가 액면 그대로 물려받을 수는 없다. 

6자회담 관련국들과의 조율을 거친 그랜드 바겐은 북의 핵 폐기와 북이 원하는 모든 것을 맞바꾸자는 제안이다. 대규모 경제적 지원과 북-미 관계정상화, 나아가 김정일 체제의 보장까지 담고 있다. 방한한 제임스 스타인버그 미 국무부 부장관은 “북한이 (6자회담에) 호응한다면 엄청난 기회가 주어질 것”이라고 말했다. 북이 이를 거부한다면 국제사회의 혹독한 대북 제재를 피할 수 없다. 북은 현명하게 판단해야 할 것이다.

원자바오 중국 총리는 4∼6일 방북 기간에 북과 경제 무역 교육 관광 분야에서 일련의 협정을 체결할 것이라고 한다. 말이 협정이지 경제 원조를 해주겠다는 것이다. 중국은 2005년 10월 후진타오 주석이 방북했을 때도 20억 달러 상당의 원조를 해준 바 있다. KOTRA에 따르면 작년 북의 교역 규모는 38억2000만 달러(남북 간 거래 제외)로 그중 73%가 중국과의 거래였다.

북에 영향력이 큰 중국이 협조하지 않는다면 국제사회의 북핵 폐기 공조가 실효를 거두기 어렵다. 중국의 대북 지원은 어떤 경우에도 국제 공조를 유지하면서 북의 핵 폐기를 실질적으로 유도하는 데 도움이 되는 방향으로 이뤄져야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://www.donga.com/fbin/output?n=200910050123|[단독]北 컨테이너 4개 압수]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 5일 1면)

고기정, 윤희각, 차준호

국가정보원과 해양경찰청이 지난달 한국 영해에서 북한 컨테이너 4개를 압수한 것으로 알려졌다. 이번 조치는 5월 25일 북한의 2차 핵실험 이후 유엔 안전보장이사회가 채택한 대북 제재 결의에 따라 한국이 북한 화물을 검색하고 유통을 차단한 첫 사례로 기록될 것으로 전망된다.

4일 정부 관계자들에 따르면 9월 중순 해양경찰청은 부산 신항을 출발하려던 파나마 선적 화물선에 출항정지 명령을 내리고 배에 실려 있던 북한 컨테이너 4개를 압수해 내용물을 분석하고 있다. 당시 해양경찰청은 국정원의 요청에 따라 이 같은 조치를 취했다. 이 화물선은 중국을 거쳐 부산 신항에 입항했던 것으로 알려졌다. 정부 관계자는 “아직 외부에 구체적으로 공개할 단계는 아니지만 지난달 북한과 관련된 컨테이너를 확보한 것은 맞다”고 확인했다.

정부는 이번 사안의 민감성을 감안해 극도의 보안을 유지하고 있다. 정부 당국자들은 어떤 경위로 북한 화물을 압수했는지, 해당 컨테이너에 무엇이 들어 있었는지, 선박의 목적지가 어디였는지 등 세부 사안에 대해 답변을 거부하고 있다.

하지만 국정원의 요청으로 북한 컨테이너를 압수했다는 점에서 유엔의 대북 제재와 연관이 있을 것으로 보인다. 한 외교안보 전문가는 “유엔 안보리의 대북 제재 결의 1874호에 따라 북한을 오가는 무기나 전략 물자, 사치품에 대해 화물 검색 및 압수 조치를 취할 수 있다”고 말했다. 정부는 7월 북한 선박에 대한 화물 검색을 강화하는 내용의 국가이행보고서를 유엔 안보리에 제출한 바 있다.

6월 중순 북한 남포항을 출항한 선박 강남1호는 유엔의 대북 제재에 따른 미국의 집중적인 추적을 받는 바람에 목적지로 알려진 미얀마로 가지 못한 채 동남아시아 인근 해역에서 뱃머리를 돌려 7월 초 북한으로 되돌아갔다.

당시 미국은 중국 및 동남아 국가들의 적극적인 협조를 받아 북한을 강하게 압박했다. 따라서 이번 한국정부의 북한 화물 압수 조치도 대북 제재의 연장선에서 주요국들과의 협의 아래 이뤄졌을 가능성이 높다.

이번 압수가 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(PSI)에 따른 조치일 수도 있다. 정부는 북한의 2차 핵실험 다음 날인 5월 26일 PSI 전면 참여를 선언했다. PSI는 핵무기나 생화학무기, 미사일 거래를 차단하기 위한 국제 협력체로 자국 영토나 수역에서 대량살상무기를 운송하는 것으로 의심되는 선박이나 항공기를 검색하고, 영해나 영공 통과를 거부하는 조치를 취한다.

정부의 다른 관계자는 “시간이 좀 더 지나면 관계 당국에서 이번 조치에 대한 설명이 있을 것”이라고 말했다. 해당 내용물에 대한 분석이 완벽하게 끝난 뒤 주변국과의 외교적 협의, 북한과의 교섭, 한반도 주변 정세 등을 전략적으로 고려해 판단할 사안이라는 것이다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1582.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001582 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 5, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Can Chinese Premier's Visit to Pyongyang Become 
Turning Point for N. Korea to Return to Six-Party Talks? 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, All TVs 
"China will Make Great Contributions to Peace and Stability on 
Korean Peninsula;" China's Premier Arrives in Pyongyang 
for Meeting with Kim Jong-il Today 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
National Intelligence Service, Korea Coast Guard Seize Four N. 
Korean Containers 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun, Segye Ilbo 
Chinese Premier Greeted by N. Korean Leader Kim Jong-il 
upon Arrival at Pyongyang's Airport 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
67 Percent of Local Government Chiefs Favor Merger of Cities, 
Counties and Districts 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to ROKG sources, the National Intelligence Service and the 
Korea Coast Guard seized four North Korean containers from a 
Panama-flagged cargo vessel docked at a new port in Busan last 
month. This is the first time since the UN Security Council adopted 
resolutions sanctioning North Korea that the ROK has inspected North 
Korean cargo and blocked its distribution. (Dong-a) 
 
The 11 North Koreans who arrived at the ROK's east coast on Oct. 1 
made it clear that they wished to defect to the ROK. According to 
the Unification Ministry, however, Pyongyang urged Seoul twice to 
send them back. (All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao arrived in Pyongyang yesterday for a 
three-day visit. North Korean leader Kim Jong-il personally greeted 
Wen at the airport, a rare gesture that raises expectations for a 
breakthrough on the North Korean nuclear issue. (All) 
 
North Korean Premier Kim Yong-il was quoted as saying during a 
meeting with the Chinese premier that North Korea is willing to 
denuclearize the Korean Peninsula through bilateral and multilateral 
talks. (All) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao's arrival in Pyongyang yesterday for a 
three-day state visit received prominent press coverage today. 
According to media reports, Wen's visit is the first by a Chinese 
premier in 18 years, and North Korean leader Chairman Kim Jong-il 
personally greeted Wen at the airport, a rare gesture that raises 
expectations for a breakthrough on the North Korean nuclear issue. 
 
Chinese Premier Wen was widely quoted as stating immediately after 
landing in Pyongyang: "China will make great contributions to the 
peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula." 
 
Most media also noted that North Korean Premier Kim Yong-il met with 
the Chinese premier and quoted him as saying during the meeting: 
 
SEOUL 00001582  002 OF 006 
 
 
"North Korea is willing to denuclearize the Korean Peninsula through 
bilateral and multilateral talks." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo cited experts as speculating that the two 
countries will have discussions on various joint projects as well as 
oil and food aid worth at least hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Chosun went on to comment: "China, in return, wants North Korea to 
return to the Six-Party Talks.  The talks are Beijing's best hope of 
maintaining the initiative in denuclearization efforts." 
 
Newspapers carried the following front-and inside-page headlines: 
"Can Chinese Premier's Visit Become Turning Point for N. Korea to 
Return to Six-Party Talks?; Chinese Premier Wen Visits N. Korea 
Carrying Economic Gift" (conservative Chosun Ilbo); "Kim Jong-il's 
Special Treatment to Chinese Premier Designed for Free Economic Aid 
from China" (right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo); "Will N. Korea Give 
China Gift Regarding Six-Party Talks?" (moderate Hankook Ilbo); and 
"Political Situation on Korean Peninsula Enters Negotiation Phase to 
Dismantle N. Korea's Nuclear Program" (left-leaning Hankyoreh 
Shinmun) 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized today: "While stating its 
opposition to a nuclear-armed North Korea, China has given North 
Korea breathing room at every crucial moment by providing it with 
massive economic aid. ... Unless Premier Wen Jiabao makes it clear 
to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il that there is no alternative to 
dismantling the North's nuclear program, the international community 
will doubt China's real intentions toward North Korea." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo's editorial observed: "Kim extended an 
extraordinary welcome by greeting Wen at the airport in person, so 
there is a chance the North Korean leader will make meaningful 
comments on his country's nuclear program in consideration of 
Beijing's dignity. ... Kim must keep in mind that Beijing has 
constantly supported the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
Beijing would rather hear Pyongyang's declaration of a return to the 
Six-Party Talks rather than the warm welcome that mobilized hundreds 
of thousands of North Koreans." 
 
In another editorial on Saturday, Dong-a argued: "Without China's 
cooperation, international efforts to denuclearize North Korea will 
likely fail.  Beijing's aid to Pyongyang should be carried out in a 
way that maintains international cooperation and prompts North Korea 
to make substantial progress in nuclear dismantlement." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo today front-paged a report citing ROKG 
sources as saying yesterday that the National Intelligence Service 
and the Korea Coast Guard seized four North Korean containers from a 
Panama-flagged cargo vessel docked at a new port in Busan last 
month.  The report noted that this is the first time since the UN 
Security Council adopted resolutions sanctioning North Korea that 
the ROK has inspected North Korean cargo and blocked its 
distribution. 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
IS N. KOREA READY TO RETURN TO 6-PARTY TALKS? 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 5, 2009, page 27) 
 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao began a three-day visit to North Korea on 
Sunday. North Korean leader Kim Jong-il personally greeted him at 
Pyongyang Airport.  The official purpose of Wen's visit is to 
commemorate 60 years of relations between the two countries, but the 
meeting between Wen and Kim is widely expected to lead to a turning 
point in multilateral efforts to resolve the North Korean nuclear 
standoff, with hopes that the North will take the opportunity to 
announce its return to Six-Party nuclear talks. 
 
During last month's visit to North Korea by Chinese State Councilor 
Dai Bingguo, an envoy for Chinese President Hu Jintao, Kim said his 
regime wished to resolve the nuclear standoff through "bilateral and 
multilateral talks."  There is now hope that that the world will get 
 
SEOUL 00001582  003 OF 006 
 
 
a clearer picture during Wen's visit of what Kim meant by 
"multilateral talks." 
 
There is speculation that the North is trying to change the 
framework of the Six-Party negotiations.  Some are wondering whether 
it will propose three-way talks with the United States and China or 
bilateral talks with the U.S. while the other four countries in the 
Six-Party framework act as observers. 
 
Regardless of which scenario proves to be correct, it is 
unacceptable for the ROK, the host of the G20 summit, to be left out 
of nuclear negotiations whose outcome will determine its fate. 
China has consistently supported the Six-Party talks.  There is a 
broad consensus within the international community that they are the 
best way to peacefully resolve the North Korean nuclear standoff. 
Hopefully Wen's visit will lead to North Korea returning to them. 
 
(Wen's visit) marks a turning point. But there have been so many 
turning points in the talks, and none of them have led to the 
dismantling of North Korea's nuclear weapons program.  All they have 
done is buy the North more time.  Even if North Korea returns to the 
Six-Party Talks, chances are slim that it will abandon its nuclear 
arms program.  North Korea has rejected a package deal offered by 
the ROK and the United States.  It appears that another round of 
prolonged talks may be in store, which may well mean that there is 
no hope of getting North Korea to scrap its nuclear program. 
 
The standoff is also a problem for China.  If Beijing had taken a 
firm stance by putting top priority on getting Kim Jong-il to scrap 
the program, it could have avoided the nightmare of a nuclear-armed 
North Korea.  While stating its opposition to a nuclear-armed North 
Korea, China has given North Korea breathing room at every crucial 
moment by providing it with massive economic aid.  Now Wen has 
traveled to North Korea carrying with him promises of massive 
financial support again.  If the North returns to the Six-Party 
talks in exchange for such aid, it probably has no intention of 
getting rid of its nuclear weapons and is merely interested in 
getting out from under international sanctions. 
 
Unless Premier Wen Jiabao makes it clear to North Korean leader Kim 
Jong-il that there is no alternative to dismantling the North's 
nuclear program, the international community will doubt China's real 
intentions toward North Korea.  And the response of the ROK, which 
stands to suffer the most from a nuclear-armed North Korea, and 
other neighboring countries will change dramatically. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
BOAT PEOPLE SHOW N. KOREANS' GRIM REALITY 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 5, 2009, page 31) 
 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao has started a three-day visit to North 
Korea, the first by a Chinese premier in 18 years, as both countries 
mark the 60th anniversary of bilateral ties.  The ROK's attention, 
however, is focused on how the visit will affect the North Korean 
nuclear standoff.  How North Korean leader Kim Jong-il responds to 
Beijing's request to return to the six-party nuclear talks will 
determine Pyongyang's fate. Following Wen's Pyongyang visit, the 
leaders of the ROK, China and Japan will hold a summit in Beijing 
Saturday.  If North Korea changes, the three leaders will revise 
their strategies toward Pyongyang.  If North Korea intends to give 
up its nuclear program and return to dialogue, it has an opportunity 
it cannot afford to miss. 
 
Kim went to Sunan Airport near Pyongyang to personally greet Wen. 
North Korea's Korean Central Television said Wen "received an 
enthusiastic welcome at the airport and by crowds of people from all 
walks of life on the miles-long streets of Pyongyang." 
 
Kim extended an extraordinary welcome by greeting Wen at the airport 
in person, so there is a chance the North Korean leader will make 
meaningful comments on his country's nuclear program in 
 
SEOUL 00001582  004 OF 006 
 
 
consideration of Beijing's dignity.  Wen said upon arrival in 
Pyongyang, "China will make important contributions to peace and 
stability on the Korean Peninsula."  Kim must keep in mind that 
Beijing has constantly supported the denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula.  Beijing would rather hear Pyongyang's declaration of a 
return to the Six-Party Talks rather than the warm welcome that 
mobilized hundreds of thousands of North Koreans. 
 
North Korea cannot afford to remain nonchalant at this point. 
Eleven North Korean defectors were found on a small fishing boat 
Thursday.  While South Koreans headed for their hometowns to 
celebrate the Chuseok holidays, the 11 North Koreans risked their 
lives.  U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon the same day submitted a 
report to the UN Security Council saying that more than a third of 
North Koreans are suffering from hunger due to food shortages. 
Earlier, the World Food Program and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization also warned that nine million North Koreans will suffer 
from hunger this year.  Even the head of the North Korean Red Cross, 
Jang Jae On, implicitly asked the ROK for food aid during the 
inter-Korean family reunions at Mount Kumgang Sept. 26, saying, "It 
would be nice if the ROK does a corresponding favor to the North." 
 
The North conducted its second nuclear test in May, but the only 
thing it secured was a worsening food shortage.  Over the 10-year 
reign of liberal governments in the ROK, Pyongyang barely survived 
the food shortages with the help of rice and fertilizer aid from 
Seoul.  If the North does not give up its nuclear program, North 
Koreans will keep fleeing their country and go hungry.  How much 
longer can Pyongyang lie to its people through propaganda like "The 
Dear Leader appreciated the August Full Moon, praying for the 
happiness of the people?"  The ROK must also devise comprehensive 
and well-planned measures to handle mass defections of North Koreans 
by sea. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
N. KOREA SHOULD RESPOND TO INTERNATIONAL OFFERS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 2, 2009, page 23) 
 
North Korea yesterday rejected ROK President Lee Myung-bak's "grand 
bargain" proposal on getting Pyongyang to get rid of its nuclear 
program.  The North's state-run Korea Central News Agency said that 
Seoul is "seriously mistaken" if it calculated that Pyongyang will 
accept the "ridiculous proposal" for the normalization of relations 
and economic aid.  In a speech Monday to the U.N. General Assembly, 
North Korean Vice Foreign Minister Pak Kil-yon said the North will 
"act responsibly" in the management and use of its nuclear weapons 
and on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.  Yet Pyongyang's 
latest comment suggests the North is behaving like a nuclear state. 
 
 
Sunday will mark the fourth anniversary of the inter-Korean summit 
declaration between the late ROK President Roh Moo-hyun and North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-il.  The inter-Korean declaration reached at 
the event put a huge burden on Seoul through inter-Korean economic 
cooperation projects.  The cost of the Oct. 4 declaration is an 
estimated 14.3 trillion won (12.2 billion U.S. dollars) for Seoul. 
Considering the size of the North's economy, which is one-36th of 
the ROK's, the agreement is nothing short of scattering money over 
the North.  Signed just four months before the end of the Roh 
Administration, the declaration put an enormous burden on the 
succeeding Lee Government.  The incumbent administration cannot 
afford to honor the declaration, which failed to mention the North's 
nuclear program but put a unilateral financial burden on the ROK. 
 
Going through the process of coordination with other parties to the 
Six-Party nuclear talks, the declaration seeks the North's 
denuclearization in return for "whatever it wants," including 
large-scale economic aid, normalization of ties with the U.S. and a 
guarantee of the communist system under Kim.  In his visit to Seoul 
this week, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg spoke of a 
"tremendous opportunity" for Pyongyang to return to the negotiating 
 
SEOUL 00001582  005 OF 006 
 
 
table.  If North Korea rejects this offer, it will face harsh 
international sanctions so Pyongyang should make a wise judgment. 
 
During his three-day visit to Pyongyang (which started) Sunday, 
Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao reportedly plans to sign 
agreements with the North in economy, trade and tourism.  In October 
2005, China provided two billion U.S. dollars in aid to the North 
when President Hu Jintao visited Pyongyang.  According to the Korea 
Trade-Investment Promotion Agency in Seoul, trade with China 
accounted for 73 percent of the North's external trade last year 
excluding trade with the ROK. 
 
Without China's cooperation, international efforts for North Korea's 
nuclear abandonment will likely fail.  Beijing's aid to Pyongyang 
should be carried out in a way that maintains international 
cooperation and prompts North Korea to make substantial progress in 
nuclear abandonment. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE SERVICE, KOREA COAST GUARD SEIZE FOUR N. 
KOREAN CONTAINERS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 5, 2009, Front Page) 
 
By Reporters Koh Ki-jung, Yoon Hee-kak and Cha Joon-ho 
 
It has been learned that the National Intelligence Service (NIS) and 
the Korea Coast Guard seized four North Korean containers (from a 
container ship) in ROK waters.  This measure marks the first time 
that the ROK has inspected North Korean cargo and blocked its 
distribution since the UN Security Council adopted a resolution 
sanctioning North Korea after its second nuclear test on May 25. 
 
ROKG officials said on October 4 that the Korea Coast Guard laid an 
embargo on a Panama-flagged cargo vessel at Busan New Port and 
seized four North Korean containers aboard the ship in the middle of 
September and is currently analyzing their contents.  At that time, 
the Korea Coast Guard took the step at the request of the National 
Intelligence Service.  The vessel reportedly entered Busan New Port 
via China.  An ROKG official confirmed the report, saying, "Although 
we cannot disclose the details yet, it is correct that we secured 
North Korea-related containers last month." 
 
Because of the sensitivity of this incident, the ROKG is keeping 
tight-lipped about it.  ROKG officials declined to comment on how 
they obtained the North Korean cargo, what was in the containers and 
where the ship was headed. 
 
However, because the North Korean containers were seized at the 
behest of the NIS, this issue appears linked to the UN sanctions on 
the North.  A foreign policy and security expert said, "Under UN 
Security Council Resolution 1874, cargos of weapons, strategic 
materials, and luxuries coming from and going to North Korea can be 
inspected and seized."  In July, the ROKG submitted its progress 
report on strengthening the cargo inspection of North Korean vessels 
to the UN Security Council. 
 
The Kang Nam 1 left the North Korean port of Nampo in mid June and 
was headed for Myanmar.  However, the ship reversed its course off 
the coast of Southeast Asia and returned to the North in early July 
after being trailed by the U.S. under UN Security Council sanctions. 
 At that time, the U.S. intensified pressure on Pyongyang by 
actively cooperating with China and Southeast countries.  Therefore, 
there is a high possibility that the ROK may have seized the North 
Korean containers with the cooperation of other countries as part of 
(international) efforts to enforce sanctions against the North. 
 
There also is a likelihood that the seizure resulted from the 
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI).  On May 26, a day after 
 
SEOUL 00001582  006 OF 006 
 
 
North Korea's second nuclear test, the ROKG announced that it will 
participate fully in the PSI.  The PSI was formed to increase 
international cooperation in interdicting shipments of nuclear 
weapons, biochemical weapons and missiles.  The PSI allows states to 
stop and search ships suspected of carrying weapons of mass 
destruction within their territorial waters and to refuse the 
transport of proliferation shipments through their territory. 
 
Another ROKG official said that related authorities will explain the 
seizure after some time passes.  When the analysis of the containers 
is completed, the ROK will make a determination (what to do about 
the cargo) after consulting with neighboring countries, and 
negotiating with North Korea and strategically considering the 
Korean Peninsula situation. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>