^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL445  |  2009-03-20 07:48  |  비밀(2급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PHSA PINS PREL PTER MARR MASS AF KN KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 세드니 부차관보 3월 1~3일 서울서 한미 안보정책구상회의 ======
비 밀 SEOUL 000445 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
홀부룩 아프간, 파키스탄 특별 대표와 국가정보국 국장 블레어 해군 제독, 그리고 국무부/재건및안정조정국에 전달 바람

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 03/17/2019 
태그: PHSA(([High Seas Affairs])), PINS(([National Security])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), PTER(([Terrorists and Terrorism])), MARR(([Military and Defense Arrangements])), MASS(([Military Assistance and Sales])), AF(([Afghanistan])), KN(([Korea (North)])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 세드니 부차관보 3월 1~3일 서울서 한미 안보정책구상회의
분류자: 정치 공사 참사관 조셉 윤.  근거 1.4 (b/d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/08/28 05:39//
===== 요약 =====

1. (기밀) 북한 문제에 대한 긴밀한 공조, 한미동맹 3개 분야에서 유의미한 진전, 한국의 대규모 아프간 지원 압박 등이 데이비스 세드니의 3월 1~3일 서울 회담의 성격을 말해준다.
  * (기밀) 3월 1일 세드니 부차관보는 외교통상부 이백순 국장과 더불어 기지 반환에 관한 새로운 공동환경절차평가서에 합의하였다. 다음날 열린 제21차 한미 안보정책구상회의(개별 전문으로 보고)에서 미국과 한국 대표단은 올해 반환하는 7개 주한미군 시설에 대해 공동환경절차평가를 적용해 반환하기로 약속했다. 대다수 전문가는 특히 캠프 하야리아의 경우가 어려울 것으로 예상했다.

  * (기밀) 세드니는 이상희 국방부 장관과 3월 2일 회동 하였다. 그 자리에서 이상희 국방부 장관은 한국이 아프간에 군사적, 비군사적 원조를 제공할 생각이지만, 병력 파병 결정은 더 시간이 걸린다고 말하였다. 청와대 김태효 대외전략기획관도 같은 말을 했다.

  * (기밀) 세드니 부차관보의 관심은 아프간에 있었다. 세드니는 한국 주재 아프간 대사와 오찬 겸 조정 협의를 한 이후 김태효 대외전략비서관과 외교통상부 이용준 차관과 함께 아프간 문제를 논의하기 위해 그들과 회동하였다. 그 자리에서 세드니는 한국 정부의 아프간 일괄 지원 방안에 대해 환영하되 불충분하다고 분명히 밝혔다. 세드니는 지난주 아프간의 주요 장관과 함께한 회동에 대해 언급하면서 즉각적이고 성의 있는 큰 규모의 돈과 조언, 능력배양 등의 지원을 주문하였다.
 
  * (비밀) 세드니가 만난 한국 당국자 전원은 최근 북한의 조치와 관련(대포동2, 북방한계선, 남북장성급 회담) 세드니의 조언 청취에 큰 관심을 보였다. 김태효 대외전략기획관도 북한이 남북장성급 회담을 이용해 한미 양국 사이를 이간질할 가능성이 매우 크다며 주의를 당부하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 추가적인 정보 누설에 대해 경고하고 한미 양국이 긴밀히 협의해서 이 문제를 처리하는 것이 중요하다고 강조하였다.
2. (민감하지만 미분류) 세드니의 방문은 공동환경절차평가서 협상의 성공적인 결론과 아울러 한국 국회가 방위비 분담금 특별협정과 아프리카의 뿔 해역에 한국 구축함을 파견하는 법안(국군부대의 소말리아 해역 파견 동의안)을 통과시켰다는 매우 긍정적인 소식으로 마감되었다. 요약 끝.

3. (민감하지만 미분류) 3월 1~3일 데이비드 세드니 국방부 아시아태평양 안보담당 부차관보는 국무부와 국방부 당국자들을 대동하고 제21차 한미 안보정책구상회의를 위해 서울에 왔다. 세드니는 방한 중에 이용준 외교통상부 차관, 이백순 외교통상부 북미국장, 이상희 국방부 장관, 카림 라히미 주한 아프간 대사, 김장수 한나라당 국회의원과 박진, 김태효 대외전략기획관 등과 개별 회동을 하였다. 세드니는 한국 정부의 외곽의 안보 전문가 3명과도 회동하였다: 김병국 전 외교안보수석과 서울대학교 교수 하영선과 윤영관과도 회동하였다. 제21차 한미 안보정책구상회의 결과는 개별 전문으로 보고하였다.

===== 성공적인 공동환경절차평가서 결과 =====

4. (기밀) 세드니 부차관보의 서울 회동 일정은 이백순 외교통상부 국장과 함께한 한미 공동환경절차평가서에 관한 3월 1일 최종 협상 일정으로 시작되었다. 이백순 국장은 3월 2일 제21차 한미 안보정책구상회의에 앞서 1년 넘게 끌어온 협상을 타결하든지 아니면 폐기하라는 청와대와 외교통상부의 명령을 받은 상태였다. 그런 그가 공동환경절차평가서 계약서 문구에 다섯 가지 비교적 사소한 변경을 요청하였다. 미국 측은 그의 요청 가운데 변경이 가능한 부분에 대해 합의했고 이 국장은 나머지 부분에 대해 타협안을 제공하였다.

5. (기밀) 미국 정부가 2008년 12월 8일 타협안에 포함된 한층 진취적인 문안에서 후퇴하였다고 불평하였다. 또한, 협상안 내용이 결국에 "지나치게 물타기 된" 상태가 되어 우려스럽다고 말했다. 그러나 그의 임무가 합의 실패가 아닌 합의 도출에 동기 부여된 상태에서 그가 한국 정부를 대신하여 최종 텍스트를 승인할 권한을 위임받았다고 천명하고 악수로써 최종 텍스트를 추인하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 협상 직후 최종 수정안에 대해 국방부실 법무 자문의원이 수용할 수 있다고 확인해 주었다. 그는 국무부와 주한미군의 추인과 함께 양국의 협상이 타결되었음을 이백순 국장에게 통보하였다. 양측은 다음 날 (3월 2일) 안보정책구상회의 석상에서 공동환경절차평가서를 공식 승인하였다. 한미 주둔군 지위 협정 합동위원회 공동 위원장이 조만간 합의 각서에 서명할 예정이며 그 뒤 계약이 발효될 것이다.

===== 한국의 아프간 지원 반갑지만, 그리 충분하지 않아 =====

6. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 한국의 아프간 지원 논의를 위해 김태효 대외전략기획관과 이용준 외교통상부 차관보와 회동했다. 그는 그에 앞서 주한 아프간 대사 카림 라히미와 오찬 석상 조정 회의를 열었다(개별 전문 보고). 라히미는 한국 정부가 충분할 정도로 아프간을 돕고 있지 않으며 외교통상부 당국자들이 그를 냉대하고 있다고 불평하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 이어진 김태효 대외전략기획관과의 청와대 회동 자리에서 한국의 아프간 지원 전망에 대한 솔직한 평가를 요청하였다. 아프가니스탄 상황은 심각한 안보 위협이 되고 있지만, 한미 양국의 노력과 북대서양조약기구(나토) 회원국의 노력에 전 세계 여타 친선국과 우방국의 강력한 지원이 보강된다면 형세를 반전시킬 수 있다고 세드니 차관보는 대답하였다. <wrap hi>미국 정부가 (한국으로부터) 5년에 걸쳐 매해 미화 1억 달러의 재정 지원을 비롯해 한국의 대단위 원조를 기대하고 있다고 세드니는 말하였다.</wrap> 한국이 앞서 미 국가안전보장회의에 제시한 지원 패키지는 반갑지만, 그리 충분하지 않다고 세드니는 말하였다. 목이 탈 때 물 한 방울은 반갑지만, 물 한 컵이 더 낫고 새로운 급수 시설이 생긴다면 문제가 해결될 거라고 세드니는 설명하였다. 예를 들어, 미국이 병력 17,000명을 추가로 아프가니스탄에 파병하기로 한다면 긍정적인 영향이 즉각적으로 크게 미칠 것이다. 다만 주둔 확대는 더 많은 전투와 더 많은 희생자를 양산하는 결과가 될 공산 크다. 세드니는 김태효 대외전략기획관과의 회동 자리에서 아프간에서 무슨 일이 벌어지냐에 따라 한미동맹은 중요한 시험대에 오를 거라고 말했다. 그는 미국을 상대로 한 테러리스트의 또 다른 대형 공격이 있게 된다면, 그 경격은 아프가니스탄과 파키스탄 국경 사이나 그 지역 부족이 기획한 것일 거라고 언급했다. “아프간에서 무슨 일이 벌어지냐에 따라 전체 서구 세계에 영향을 미칠 것이다”라고 한 홀부룩 특별 대표의 말을 인용했고, 외교부 이 차관보는 한국도 그 서구 세계의 일부라고 대답하였다.<WRAP center round info 90%>//**오바마의 지시에 100% 화답하는 MB, 5억 달러 대령이요~**//
…(중략) 또한, 한국은 아프간 국군을 재정적으로 지원하기 위해 미화 5억 달러를 (5년간 매년 1억 달러씩) 약속한 바 있습니다. 한국 정부의 고위 관리들은 5억 달러 지원은 순조롭게 진행 중이며, 국회의 승인이 필요하지 않은 한국 정부의 “예비비”에서 충당할 예정이라고 우리를 안심시켜 주었습니다. [[09seoul1529|제 목: 12월 29-30일 국무부 부장관의 남한 방문을 위한 무대연출]] //주한 미국 대사관 전문//
</WRAP>

7. (비밀) 김태효 대외전략기획관은 아프간 문제의 심각성과 현재까지 한국의 (아프간) 대응에 대한 미국 정부의 시각을 이해한다고 대답하였다. 그는 2월에 미 국가안전보장회의에 전달한 한국의 원조 제안은 단지 일차 원조이며 한국 정부가 현재 군사와 비군사를 망라한 추가 원조를 현재 고려하고 있다고 말하였다. 한국이 한미 동맹뿐만이 아니라 한국의 세계 외교를 위해서 아프간에서 더 많은 일을 하는 것이 중요하다며 한국 정부는 한국민을 상대로 (아프간 지원이) 세계 외교 목적임을 강조하게 될 거라고 덧붙였다. 김태효는 청와대가 몇 주 안으로 미 고위 당국자에게 한국의 이차 원조에 관해 얘기하게 될 거라고 덧붙였다.

8. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 청와대 회동 이후 외교통상부 이용준 차관보를 예방하였다. 이 차관보는 지난 1월 아프간을 방문한 현지 조사팀의 이끌었다. 그는 2월에 한국 외교안보수석이 미 국가안보국 존스에게 제공한 한국의 원조 패키지 사본을 세드니에게 건넨 바 있다. 이 차관보는 제21차 한미 안보정책구상회의 바로 전날 즉각적이고 성의 있는 큰 규모의 원조가 필요하다고 세드니가 말했다며 미국이 추가 요구를 하는 것인지 문의했다. 세드니는 맞는다고 대답하며 한국의 지원 패키지 중 일부는 예로 오토바이 300대와 구급차 100대 제공은 도움이 될 것이고, 다른 부분인 예로 바그람 공군 기지에 민간 의료 요원을 늘리겠다는 계획은 2년 전 한국군이 바그람 의료 시설에서 의료 임무를 수행할 당시의 수준으로 인원을 복원하는 정도가 될 거라고 대답했다.

9. (비밀) 아프간에서 펼쳐지고 있는 “소탕, 점령, 건설” 전략을 외교통상부가 어떻게 지원할 것인지 더 전략적인 사고를 해줄 것을 세드니는 권고하였다. 세드니는 3월 20일에 완료될 예정인 미국 정부의 아프간 전략 검토에 대해 외교부의 의견 개진도 청하였다. 우리는 한국의 의견 개진과 실천 등 전폭적인 노력을 원한다고 세드니는 촉구하였다. 이 차관은 한국이 더 많은 원조를 제공하길 기대하고 있지만, 선호하는 추가 지원 방식은 현금이 아닌 현물 지원이 될 거라는 견해를 덧붙였다. 세드니 부차관보는 현물 지원은 즉각적이고 긍정적인 효과를 발휘할 때에만 유용할 거라고 대답하였다. 그는 기계류 원조는 유지 보수를 동반한다는 점에 주의를 당부하였다. 마지막으로 세드니는 지난 주 카불에서 만난 아프간 장관들은 돈과 자문, 능력배양 등의 문제가 가장 절실하다고 했지 현물 지원을 요청하지는 않았다고 지적하였다.

10. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 3월 2일 이상희 국방부 장관을 예방한 자리에서 캐나다의 아프간 전쟁 지원이 매우 인상적이라고 강조하였다. 캐나다 사람들은 다른 국가보다 많은 사상자로 고통을 받으면서도 그들이 아프간에 간 이유는 미국의 동맹국이어서가 아니라 세계 무대에서 그들이 하고자 하는 역할이 있기 때문이다. 이상희 국방부 장관은 캐나다군이 아프간에서 어떤 임무를 수행하고 있는지 조사해 볼 것을 국방부에 지시하겠다고 대답하였다. 한국 정부는 오바마 정부의 대이라크/아프간 접근의 변화에 대해서 명확하게 이해하고 있으며 향후 지원과 관련 내부에서 많은 논의가 있다고 말하였다. 한국 정부가 군사/비군사 원조를 다 같이 제공할 생각이 있지만, 2월 20일 외교통상부 장관이 클린턴 장관에게 한 발언인 국회의 반대 때문에 한국 정부가 시간이 더 필요하다는 말을 되풀이하였다.

11. (비밀) 한나라당 핵심 의원인 김장수와 박진 두 사람은 세드니 부차관보와의 개별 회동에서 한국 병력의 아프간에 파병에 대해 지지를 표명하였다. 박진 의원은 한미 FTA를 통과 등 미국이 한국에 해줄 수 있는 문제에 대해 더 많이 초점을 맞췄지만, (전 국방부 장관) 김장수 의원은 한국의 아프간 파병을 미국이 직접 요청한다면 국회에서 한나라당 파병 지지자들의 입장을 강화해 줄 거라고 말했다. 그는 한국이 미국의 요청에 응답하지 않는다면 미국이 더 많은 주한 미군 병력을 아프간에 파병하는 선택을 할 수 있다며 걱정하였다. 김장수는 동맹이란 비용과 책임을 나누는 것이라고 결론지었다. 세드니 부차관보는 미국이 주한 미군 병력을 28,500명 수준으로 유지하겠다고 이 대통령에게 약속했다고 김장수를 안심시켰지만, 아프간에서 싸우고 있는 미군 대령들이 한국전이나 베트남전에서 경험했던 한국군과의 유대를 똑같이 공유하지는 않을 거라고 우려를 표명했다. 언젠가 아프간 참전 대령들이 고위급 미군 지도자들이 될 것이며 그들이 당시 전투를 회상할 적에 한국인들이 과거처럼 그들 곁에서 싸웠다고 회상할 수는 없을 것이다. 세드니는 아프간에는 온전한 전투력을 보유한 병력이 필요하다고 언급했다. 왜냐면 일부 국가는 자국 병력 활용에 상당한 제약이 따르기 때문에 그들 국가의 지원은 역효과를 낳을 수 있다고 그는 말했다.

12. (기밀) 3월 3일 회동에서 전 외교통상부 장관을 역임했던 윤영관 현 서울대학교 교수는 남한 언론이나 한국 학계에서 아프간 문제에 대한 관심이 많지 않다고 세드니에게 말하였다. 그는 대다수 사람들은 북한의 미사일 발사 가능성에 초점을 맞추고 있다고 단언했다. 그는 대다수 남한 사람들은 유엔이 앞장서는 것보다는 한국 정부가 통일 노력을 주도하는 독일식 통일 모델을 따라 하길 선호한다고 말했다. 한국 통일이 어떻게 전개되든 관계없이 국제사회로부터 엄청난 규모의 경제 원조가 필요할 거라는 점에 견해를 같이하였다. 윤영관은 그러므로 한국이 아프간을 비롯해 국제 원조 프로그램에 더 적극적인 역할을 수행하는 것이 현명할 것이라는 흥미로운 발언을 했다. 왜냐면 한국 통일로 인해 한국 내부에 충격을 감당하려면 비슷하게 국제사회로부터 대규모 원조 요청을 하기가 수월해질 것이기 때문이다.

===== 북한 문제 협력을 위한 권고 =====

13. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보가 서울에서 만난 모든 사람은 오바마 정부의 대북 접근 방식에 대해 지대한 관심을 표명했다. 그들은 북방한계선에 도전장을 던지거나 인공위성 발사 권리를 주장하는 등 최근 평양에서 나오는 도발적인 성명에 대한 미국의 견해를 물었다. 3월 2일 인민군이 유엔사령부를 접촉해 7년 만에 영관급 회담을 요청한 부분도 역시 논의하였다. 세드니 부차관보는 크게 봐서 한미 동맹에 대한 다짐을 필두로 미국의 아시아 정책은 무수한 행정부를 거치는 동안에 일관성을 유지해왔지만, 미국 정부는 좀 더 협의하는 방식으로 동아시아 역내 문제에 참여할 생각임은 분명하다.

14. (비밀) 세드니는 김병국 전 외교안보수석과 하영선 서울대 교수와 함께 북한 문제를 논의했다. 그 자리에서 하영선은 중국, 미국, 남한, 일본이 북한 미사일 발사에 대해 공동 대응할 필요가 있다는 생각을 전했다. 하영선은 미사일 발사는 비핵화 문제에서 미사일 기술로 이목을 돌리길 바라는 북한 지도부의 계략이라고 보았다. 만일 그런 계략이 성공한다면 북한은 사실상 핵보유국 목표에 성공하는 것이라고 걱정했다. 하영선은 북한의 미사일 발사에 이어질 확연히 구별되는 두 단계가 있을 거라고 주장하였다. 첫 단계는 북한의 유엔결의안 1718호 위반에 대한 비난에 대해 상대적으로 손쉽게 협력하게 될 것이다. 두 번째 단계는 북한의 궁극적 목표인 북미 직접 대화라는 평양발 평화 공세라는 특성을 띠게 될 것이다. 그는 이 두 번째 단계가 바로 북한이 한미 양국 사이를 이간질하려는 단계가 될 거라며 한미 양국 모두의 주의를 촉구하였다. 김장수 전 국방부 장관은 합동전력사령부가 2008 합동작전 환경평가보고서에서 북한을 핵무기 보유국으로 적시한 민감한 내용이 못마땅하다고 언급했다. 북한이 발사한 로켓이 미사일인지 인공위성 발사체인지 알지 못한다면 미국이 취할 대응은 무엇인지 묻자 세드니는 필요할 경우 미국은 북한 로켓을 요격할 능력을 보유하고 있다고 대답하였다.

15. (비밀) 청와대 김태효 대외전략기획관은 어제 북한의 요청으로 7년 만에 처음으로 열리는 인민군과 유엔사령부 영관급 회담에 대해 미국의 지나친 낙관을 경계할 것을 당부하면서 인민군과 회담은 "낭만적인 결정”이라고 불렀다. 김태효는 우리는 시간을 할애해 한미 양국 사이에는 어떠한 틈새도 없다는 점을 인민군이 알도록 해야 한다고 김태효는 권고했다. 세드니는 인민군과 유엔사령부의 회담 결정에 앞서 주한미군 샤프 장군이 한국 합참의장과 이상희 국방부 장관과 함께 긴밀히 협의해왔다면서 말참견을 했다. 김태효 대외전략기획관은 방한한 힐러리 클린턴의 2월 20일 발언은 시의적절하며 중요하다고 말했다. 왜냐면 북한이 남북 관계 개선을 위한 조치에 나설 필요가 있다고 그녀가 강조했기 때문이다. 김태효는 미국 정부가 방코 델타 아시아 같은 대북 제재에 나설 거라고 북한이 생각했다면 북한이 또 다른 대포동 미사일 발사는 엄두도 못 냈을 거라는 견해를 피력했다. 그런 제재를 동원하는 것이 실상 한국 정부의 권고 사항인지 묻자, 김태효는 이의가 있다는 듯이 한국 정부의 핵심 쟁점은 6자 회담과 한국의 남북관계 접근 방식 사이 균형을 맞추는 것이라고 말하였다. 북한에서 무력 충돌이 발발하면 어떻게 할 것인지 한국의 견해를 묻자, 양국은 대량살상무기 수집을 위해 협력할 필요가 있으며 난민 문제의 대처하고 안정을 되찾은 다음 이른 시일 내에 북한에 시장경제를 수립할 필요가 있다고 김태효는 대답했다. 그는 개념계획 5029는 군사 계획 측면에서 거의 완성되었지만, 지금은 불안정에 대처하기 위해 정치 외교 차원에서 더 많은 숙의가 필요하다고 김태효는 말하였다. 그는 특히 중국의 역할과 반응에 대해 더 많은 논의가 필요하다고 언급했다.

16. (비밀) 이상희 국방부 장관은 한국이 북한의 모든 수사적 협박에 일일이 대응하지 않을 것이며 그 대신 냉정한 처신을 보여 줄 것이라고 세드니 부차관보에게 말했었다. 그러나 북한의 도발적인 행동에는 응당하게 단호한 대응을 낳을 것이다. 이상희 장관은 북한이 탄도미사일을 발사할 예정일지라도, 그들은 1998년 미사일 발사 이후처럼 인공위성 발사체를 쏘아 올렸다는 주장을 펼칠 거라고 언급했다. 세드니 부차관보가 만난 모든 한국의 고위급 당국자들은 북한의 발사 행위 전후 과정에서 긴밀한 한미 협의와 협력을 권고하였다. 일부 당국자는 인민군과 유엔사령부 간 장성급 회담을 위한 대응 논리를 조율할 당시 협력이 잘 이뤄졌다고 칭송했다.

17. (비밀) 세드니 부차관보는 청와대와 국방부 회동 모두에서 북한 미사일 활동에 관련한 민감한 첩보의 유출을 막아야 할 필요가 있다고 강조했다. 그는 그런 정보 유출은 양국의 선택에 제약으로 작용하는 등 양국의 이해관계를 어떻게 훼손하는지 설명하였다. 세드니는 한국 정부가 그러한 정보를 일반 대중과 소통할 필요가 있다고 판단하는 경우는 언제건 미국 정부와 한국 정부가 조율하는 자리를 마련하겠다는 등의 전략적 해결 방안을 제안하였다. 그런 식으로 양국이 정보 제공자와 첩보 습득 방법을 적절하게 보호한다는 상호 합의에 따라 공개할 수 있는 정보를 절충해낼 수 있다고 세드니는 권고하였다. 세드니가 당부한 한국 정부 당국자들은 차분하고 깊이 뉘우치고 있는 듯 보였지만, 정보 유출이 멈출 거라는 보장은 전혀 제공하지 않았다.

===== 한미 동맹을 강화하는 새로운 조치 칭송 =====

18. (기밀) 세드니가 함께한 모든 회동 자리에 있던 한국 당국자들은 이구동성으로 금주에 단행된 긍정적인 한미동맹 강화 조치를 일궈낸 훌륭한 양자 협력을 칭송하였다. 그들이 성과물로 꼽은 내용을 보면 3월 2일 비준한 2009~2013년 방위비 분담금 특별협정을 비롯해 같은 날에 일 년을 끌다가 성공적으로 타결한 기지 반환을 위한 공동환경절차평가서 협상, 한국이 KDX-II 한국형 구축함을 소말리아(아프리카의 뿔) 해역에 파견해서 해적 소탕 작전을 지원하도록 한 정부 계획을 국회가 승인한 점 등이다. 이상희 국방부 장관은 이 모든 일이 결실을 보기 위해서는 그 어느 때보다 한미 안보정책구상회의가 중요하다고 말했다. 이용준 차관은 방위비 분담금 특별협정 문제와 관련 핵심 역할을 수행한 이명박 대통령에 대한 세드니 부차관보의 사의 표시를 받아들였다. 이 차관보는 심지어 외교통상부 안에서도 이 대통령의 역할은 잘 알려지지 않았다면서, 이 대통령이 실제로 사적으로 방위비 분담금 결정에 관여했다고 말했다. 이 차관보는 자신이 외교통상부에 “지시해서” 장기간의 방위비 분담 특별협정에 합의했다고 세드니에게 말하였다.

19. (기밀) 이 차관보는 공동환경절차평가서 합의에 대해 (세드니와) 축하 인사를 나눴다. 그 뒤에 그는 제21차 한미 안보정책구상회의 개최 시기와 맞춰 동 합의를 타결하거나 아니면 기존의 부속서 A 협의 절차를 이용하는 상태로 되돌리라고 자신이 한국 협상팀에 말했다고 털어놓았다. 그는 올해 반환 예정인 7개 주한 미군 시설에 적용할 공동환경절차평가서의 원만한 이행이(이상희 국방부 장관은 신속 이행을 촉구) 합의문 내용 자체보다 훨씬 중요하다고 당부하였다. 외교통상부와 국방부는 공히 구축함 “문무 대왕함”의 소말리아 파견과 관련해 한국이 세계 안보 문제 해결에 동참한 훌륭한 사례라며 자랑스럽게 치켜세웠다. 이상희 국방부 장관은 미국과 한국이 해결하지 못할 어려운 문제는 없지만, 국회와 한국민의 지지 역시 필요하다고 말하며 한미 동맹의 현주소를 요약하였다. 이상희 장관은 계속해서 동맹사업을 잘 수행해 줄 것을 양국의 동맹 관리자들에게 촉구하였다.

20. (미분류) 세드니 부차관보는 이 전문을 승인하였다.
스티븐스
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/14/09seoul445|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL445.rtf>
S E C R E T SEOUL 000445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO DNI ADMIRAL BLAIR, SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE 
FOR AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN AMBASSADOR HOLBROOKE AND S/CRS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2019 
TAGS: PHSA [High Seas Affairs], PINS [National Security], PREL [External Political Relations], PTER [Terrorists and Terrorism], MARR [Military and Defense Arrangements], MASS [Military Assistance and Sales], AF [Afghanistan], KN [Korea (North)], KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: DASD SEDNEY'S MARCH 1-3 SECURITY POLICY MEETINGS 
IN SEOUL 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Close coordination on North Korea, significant 
progress in three areas of the U.S.-ROK alliance, and a push 
for a major ROK contribution in Afghanistan characterized 
DASD David Sedney's March 1-3 meetings in Seoul. 
 
-- (C) Sunday March 1, DASD Sedney reached agreement with 
MOFAT DDG Lee on the new Joint Environmental Assessment 
Procedure (JEAP) for camp returns.  At the 21st Security 
Policy Initiative talks the following day (SPI-21 report 
septel), the US and ROK delegations pledged to apply the JEAP 
to the return of seven USFK facilities later this year.  Most 
expect that will be difficult, particularly in the case of 
Camp Hialeah. 
 
-- (C) At the March 2 meeting with the Minister of National 
Defense, MND Lee said the ROK was thinking of providing 
both military and non-military assistance to Afghanistan, but 
the decision on troops would take more time.  Blue House DNSA 
Kim said the same. 
 
-- (C) DASD Sedney's focus was on Afghanistan.  After first 
holding a coordination lunch with the Afghan ambassador to 
the ROK, he met with DNSA Kim and MOFAT DFM Lee to discuss 
the issue, making it clear the ROKG's Afghan assistance 
package was welcomed, but inadequate.  Quoting key Afghan 
ministers he had met with the previous week in Kabul, Sedney 
called for immediate, serious, and large contributions of 
money, mentoring, and capacity building efforts. 
 
-- (S) ROK officials he met with were all keenly interested 
in hearing his views on recent DPRK actions (TD2, NLL, GO 
talks).  DNSA Kim cautioned that the DPRK was most likely 
attempting to use the General Officer (GO) talks to drive a 
wedge between Washington and Seoul.  Mr. Sedney warned 
against further damaging intelligence leaks and stressed the 
importance of close U.S.-ROK consultation in the handling of 
those matters. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In addition to the successful conclusion of the 
JEAP negotiation, the visit ended on two very positive notes 
with word that the National Assembly had passed both the SMA 
and the legislation to send a ROK destroyer to the Horn of 
Africa. 
 
----------- 
END SUMMARY 
----------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) From March 1-3, David Sedney, Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense (DASD) for Asia-Pacific Security 
Affairs, led a U.S. delegation of State and DOD officials to 
Seoul for the 21st round of U.S.-ROK Security Policy 
Initiative  talks (SPI-21).  During his visit, Sedney held 
separate meetings with Lee Young-joon, Deputy Foreign 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MOFAT), Lee Baek-soon, 
MOFAT Deputy Director General for North American Affairs, 
Minister of National Defense (MND) Lee Sang-hee, Ambassador 
Karim Rahimi, Afghanistan's Ambassador to the Republic of 
Korea (ROK), Grand National Party (GNP) National Assembly 
members Kim Jang-soo and Park Jin, and Deputy National 
Security Advisor Kim Tae-hyo.  He also met with three 
 
security experts from outside the government: former National 
Security Advisor Kim Byung-kuk and Seoul National University 
professors Ha Young-sun and Yun Young-kwan, The outcome of 
the SPI-21 talks has been reported septel. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
SUCCESSFUL CONCLUSION OF JEAP NEGOTIATION 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) DASD Sedney's schedule of meetings in Seoul began 
with a Sunday morning March 1 final negotiation session with 
MOFAT DDG Lee on the U.S.-ROK Joint Environmental Assessment 
Procedure (JEAP).  DDG Lee, who had been ordered by the Blue 
House and MOFAT to conclude the year-long negotiation prior 
to SPI-21 on March 2 or abandon the effort entirely, 
requested five final and relatively minor changes in the 
wording of the JEAP agreement.  The U.S. side agreed to his 
requests where it could, and DDG Lee offered to compromise on 
the rest. 
 
¶5.  (C) Lee complained that the USG had gone back on more 
forward leaning language in the prior draft negotiated on 
December 8, 2008, and said he was concerned that in the end, 
the renegotiation had resulted in language the ROK side would 
find to be "too watered down."  However, being motivated to 
reach an agreement rather than fail in his assignment, Lee 
shook hands over the final text and stated that he had the 
authority to accept it on behalf of the ROKG.  Immediately 
following the negotiation, DASD Sedney confirmed that the 
final changes were also acceptable to the DOD Office of the 
General Counsel.  With State and USFK's approval, he then 
notified DDG Lee that we had reached an agreement.  The JEAP 
was formally approved by both sides at SPI-21 the following 
day (March 2).  The U.S. and ROK SOFA Joint Committee 
co-chairs will soon sign an agreed memorandum after which the 
agreement will enter into force. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
ROK CONTRIBUTION TO AFGHANISTAN WELCOME, BUT NOT NEARLY ENOUGH 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶6.  (S) Prior to meeting with DNSA Kim and MOFAT DFM Lee to 
discuss the ROK contribution to Afghanistan, DASD Sedney held 
a coordination lunch with Karim Rahimi (reported septel), the 
Afghan ambassador to the Republic of Korea.  Rahimi 
complained that the ROKG was not doing nearly enough to help 
Afghanistan and that MOFAT officials were largely giving him 
the cold shoulder.  At his subsequent Blue House meeting with 
DNSA Kim, Sedney was asked to give a frank assessment of the 
ROK contribution to Afghanistan.  Sedney replied that the 
situation in Afghanistan posed a serious security threat but 
that the USG believed we could turn the tide provided our 
efforts and those of the NATO members were augmented with 
strong support from other friends and allies around the 
world.  He stated that the USG was looking for major 
assistance from the ROK, including a financial contribution 
of USD 100 million a year for five years.  He said the 
assistance package the ROK had earlier outlined to the NSC 
was welcome, but not nearly enough.  A drop of water is 
welcome if you are thirsty, a cup of water is better, but a 
new water system would solve the problem, Sedney explained. 
As an example, Sedney noted the U.S. decision to deploy an 
additional 17,000 troops to Afghanistan, which will have a 
major and immediate positive impact - even though the 
increased presence will likely result in more combat and more 
U.S. casualties.  During his meeting with DNSA Kim, Sedney 
commented that the U.S.-ROK Alliance will face a critical 
 
test on the basis of what happens in Afghanistan.  He noted 
that if there is another major attack on the U.S. from 
terrorists, it will have been planned from the border/tribal 
area between Afghanistan and Pakistan.  Sedney quoted 
Ambassador Holbrooke as saying, "What happens in Afghanistan 
affects the whole western world," to which Deputy Foreign 
Minister Lee (MOFAT) replied that the ROK is a part of the 
western world. 
 
¶7.  (S) DNSA Kim replied that he understood both the 
seriousness of the problem in Afghanistan and Washington's 
view of the ROK response to date.  He stated that the ROK 
offer of assistance conveyed to the NSC in February was only 
a first round, and that the ROKG was now considering a 
package of additional military and non-military assistance. 
He said it was important for the ROK to do more in 
Afghanistan for the sake of the U.S.-ROK security alliance, 
as well as for South Korea's own global diplomacy, adding 
that the ROKG would be emphasizing the latter purpose to the 
Korean public.  He added that the Blue House would be talking 
to senior U.S. officials about round two in several weeks 
time. 
 
¶8.  (S) Following his meeting at the Blue House, DASD Sedney 
paid a courtesy call on Deputy Foreign Minister Lee at MOFAT. 
 Lee, who headed the ROK survey team that visited Afghanistan 
in January, handed Sedney a copy of the ROK assistance 
package the ROK National Security Advisor had given to NSA 
Jones in February.  Quoting Sedney's comment the day before 
at SPI-21 that an immediate, serious, and large commitment by 
the ROK was needed, he inquired whether the U.S. was asking 
for more.  Yes, Sedney replied, noting that while some parts 
of the ROK package, such as the offer to provide 300 
motorcycles and 100 ambulances, would be helpful, other 
parts, such as the plan to increase civilian medical 
personnel at Bagram Air Base would only bring ROK staffing of 
that facility back to the level of two years ago when the 
medical mission was being carried out by the ROK military. 
 
¶9.  (S) Sedney encouraged the Foreign Ministry to think more 
strategically about how it could assist the "clear, hold, 
build" strategy being pursued in Afghanistan.  He also 
invited the ministry to offer input to the USG strategic 
review due to be completed on March 20.  We want your input, 
your implementation, and a substantial effort, Sedney urged. 
DFM Lee stated that he anticipated that the ROK would provide 
greater assistance, but added his view that the preference 
would be for those additional contributions to be in-kind, 
rather than in cash.  DASD Sedney replied that in-kind 
contributions could be useful, but only if they have an 
immediate, positive effect.  He cautioned that any mechanical 
assistance must come with a maintenance package.  Finally, he 
pointed out that Afghan ministers he had met with the 
previous week in Kabul had identified money, mentoring and 
capacity building as being in greatest need and had not asked 
for in-kind contributions. 
 
¶10.  (S) During a March 2 courtesy call on Lee Sang-hee, the 
Minister of National Defense, DASD Sedney highlighted 
Canada's contribution to the war in Afghanistan as very 
impressive.  Despite suffering a higher rate of casualties 
than other countries, the Canadians were there not because 
they are a U.S. ally, but because of the role they wish to 
play in the world, Sedney related.  MND Lee replied that he 
would order his ministry to look into what the Canadian 
military was doing in Afghanistan.  He said the ROKG had a 
clear understanding of the changes in the Obama 
 
Aministration's approach to Iraq and Afghanistan, and was 
having a lot of internal discussions about future 
contributions.  MND Lee added that the ROKG was thinking 
about providing both military and non-military assistance, 
but repeated the Foreign Minister's comment to Secretary 
Clinton on February 20 that is government needed more time 
because of opposition within the National Assembly. 
 
¶11.  (S) Two key National Assembly members from the 
conservative Grand National Party (GNP), Kim Jang-soo and 
Park Jin, expressed support for sending ROK troops to 
Afghanistan in separate meetings with DASD Sedney.  Rep. Park 
focused more in his meeting on what the U.S. could do for the 
ROK by passing the Korean-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, but Rep. 
Kim (the former MND) said a direct request from the United 
States asking that the ROK send troops to Afghanistan would 
strengthen the hand of GNP supporters in the National 
Assembly.  He worried that if the ROK did not answer that 
call, the U.S. might choose to transfer more troops from 
Korea to Afghanistan.  Alliances, Kim concluded, are all 
about sharing costs and responsibilities.  DASD Sedney 
reassured him of the U.S. commitment to President Lee that we 
would maintain our force level at 28,500, but did express the 
concern that U.S. colonels fighting in Afghanistan would not 
share the same bonds with the ROK military that U.S. colonels 
fighting in Korea or Vietnam had experienced.  Someday, those 
colonels will be senior U.S. military leaders, and when they 
look back to their days of combat, they will not be able to 
recall that the ROK had fought by their side, as they had in 
the past. Sedney also noted that troops with full combat 
capabilities are needed in Afghanistan, stating that because 
some countries have such restrictive national caveats on 
their troops, those contributions can be counterproductive. 
 
¶12.  (C) In a March 3 meeting, former Foreign Minister Yoon 
Young-kwan, now a professor at Seoul National University 
(SNU), told Sedney that there had not been much focus in the 
South Korean media, nor in ROK academic circles, on the 
Afghanistan issue.  He asserted that most people were focused 
on a possible DPRK missile launch.  He said the majority of 
South Koreans favored following the German model for 
reunification, wherein the ROK government would take the lead 
in reunification efforts vs. one headed by the UN. 
Regardless of how Korean reunification evolved, Yoon and 
Sedney both agreed it would require massive amounts of 
economic aid from the international community. 
Interestingly, Yoon observed that it would therefore be wise 
for the ROK to play a more active role today in international 
assistance programs, including in Afghanistan, as it would 
ease the way for South Korea when it came time to make 
similar requests for massive assistance from the 
international community to cope with the domestic impacts of 
Korean unification. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR COOPERATION ON NORTH KOREA 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶13.  (S) Everyone DASD Sedney met with in Seoul expressed 
keen interest in the Obama Administration approach to the 
DPRK.  They asked for U.S. views on recent provocative 
statements out of Pyongyang about challenging the Northern 
Limit Line (NLL) and stating it was their right to launch 
satellites.  Word that the Korean People's Army had contacted 
the United Nations Command on March 2 to ask for the first 
general officer meetings in seven years was also discussed. 
DASD Sedney assured his interlocutors that, broadly speaking, 
 
U.S. Asia policy would remain consistent as it had across 
many administrations, particularly the commitment to the 
U.S.-ROK Alliance, but that the USG is clearly seeking to 
engage the region in a more consultative manner. 
 
¶14.  (S) In a discussion of North Korean issues with former 
NSA Kim Byung-kuk and SNU professor Ha Young-sun, Ha said 
he believed that China, the United States, South Korea and 
Japan needed to have a collaborative response to a DPRK 
missile launch.  He saw the missile launch as a ruse by which 
DPRK leadership hoped to shift focus from denuclearization to 
missile technology. If that were successful, Ha worried the 
DPRK would succeed in becoming a de-facto nuclear power.  He 
maintained that there would be two distinct phases following 
any DPRK missile launch.  In the first phase, the 
international community would collaborate with relative ease 
in their condemnation of the DPRK's violation of UNSCR 1718. 
The second phase would be characterized by a 
Pyongyang-initiated peace offensive with direct U.S.-DPRK 
talks as the ultimate objective, Ha opined.  He urged caution 
to both the U.S. and ROK, as it was during this second phase 
that the DPRK would seek to drive a wedge between the two 
allies.  Former Minister of National Defense Kim noted 
disapprovingly of the sensitive language in the JFCOM 2008 
Joint Operating Environment, which states that North Korea is 
a nuclear power.  When Former Minister Kim asked what 
response the U.S. would take if it did not know whether a 
rocket launched by the DPRK were a missile or SLV, Sedney 
replied that if the U.S. had to, the U.S. has the capability 
to intercept the rocket. 
 
¶15.  (S) Blue House DNSA Kim cautioned the U.S. against any 
overly optimistic views of the previous day's call by the 
DPRK for the first round of KPA-UNC General Officer Talks in 
seven years, calling it a "romantic decision" to meet with 
the KPA.  We should take our time and let them know there is 
no gap between the U.S. and the ROK, Kim advised.  Sedney 
interjected by stating that USFK GEN Sharp had closely 
consulted with both the ROK CJCS and Minister of National 
Defense Lee before moving forward with the decision to have 
the UNC meet with the KPA.  DNSA Kim said Secretary Clinton's 
February 20 comments in Seoul were timely and important 
because of her emphasis on the need for North Korea to take 
steps to improve North-South relations.  Kim opined that if 
North Korea thought the USG would employ BDA-like (Banco 
Delta Asia) sanctions against the DPRK, Pyongyang would not 
dare to fire another Taepodong missile.  DASD Sedney asked if 
employing such sanctions was in fact the recommendation of 
the ROK Government, but Kim demurred, stating that for the 
ROKG the key issue was to balance the Six-Party Talks with 
its own approach on North-South relations.  Asked for the 
ROK's view of what to do if conflict erupted in the North, 
Kim replied that we would need to work together to gather up 
the WMD, cope with the refugee problem, and restore 
stability, and establish a market economy in the north as 
quickly as possible.  He said that CONPLAN 5029 was almost 
complete in terms of military planning, but that more 
consideration now needed to be given to the diplomatic and 
political dimensions of coping with instability.  He 
mentioned the need for more discussion about China's 
role/reaction in particular. 
 
¶16.  (S) Defense Minister Lee told DASD Sedney that the ROK 
would not respond one-to-one to all the DPRK rhetorical 
threats, but rather was instead displaying a calm demeanor. 
He added, however, that the North's provocative actions would 
result in a firm response befitting those actions.  Minister 
 
Lee noted that, even if the DPRK were to launch a ballistic 
missile, North Korea will claim that they launched a SLV, as 
they did after the 1998 missile launch.  All the senior ROK 
officials with whom DASD Sedney met advised close U.S.-ROK 
consultations and cooperation before, during and after such 
actions by the North.  Several praised the excellent 
cooperation then taking place on the preparation of 
coordinated talking points for the GO Talks. 
 
¶17.  (S) At both the Blue House and MND meetings, DASD Sedney 
underlined the need to avoid any further leaks of sensitive 
intelligence information concerning North Korea's missile 
activities.  He explained how such leaks damaged our 
interests by constraining our options.  He offered a 
strategic solution by inviting the ROKG to coordinate  with 
the USG whenever it feels it has a need to communicate such 
information to its public. That way, we could work out 
releasable information on mutually agreeable terms that would 
appropriately protect sources and methods, Sedney advised. 
The ROKG officials he addressed this to appeared solemn and 
contrite, but offered no firm guarantees that leaks would 
cease. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
PRAISE FOR POSITIVE NEW STEPS THAT STRENGTHENED THE ALLIANCE 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶18.  (C) During all of Sedney's meetings with South Korean 
counterparts, ROKG officials praised the excellent bilateral 
cooperation that had resulted in positive steps taken that 
week to further strengthen the U.S.-ROK alliance. 
Accomplishments they cited included the March 2 ratification 
of the 2009-2013 Special Measures Agreement (SMA), the 
successful conclusion that same day of the year-long 
negotiation of the Joint Environmental Assessment Procedure 
(JEAP) for camp returns, and the National Assembly's approval 
of the ROKG plan to dispatch a KDX-II destroyer to assist 
with counter-piracy operations off the Horn of Africa.  MND 
Lee stated that SPI was more important than ever in helping 
to achieve those results.  On the SMA, DFM Lee accepted DASD 
Sedney's appreciation for the key role played by President 
Lee Myung-bak.  DFM Lee commented that President Lee's role 
was not well known even within MOFAT, but that he had indeed 
been personally involved in the decision.  MND Lee told 
Sedney he had "ordered" MOFAT to agree to a long-term SMA 
agreement. 
 
¶19.  (C) After exchanging congratulations on the JEAP 
agreement, DFM Lee revealed that he had told the ROK 
negotiator to conclude the agreement in time for SPI-21, or 
revert back to the use of the Tab A procedures.  He cautioned 
that the smooth (and MND Lee urged rapid) implementation of 
the JEAP for the return of seven USFK facilities later this 
year was more important than the text of the agreement 
itself.  As for the dispatch of the destroyer "Munwoo The 
Great" to Somalia, MOFAT and MND both proudly held it up as a 
great example of South Korea's participation in addressing 
global security concerns.  Summing up the state of the 
alliance, Defense Minister Lee said there was no problem too 
difficult for the U.S. and ROK to solve, but that the support 
of the National Assembly and the Korean public was needed as 
well.  Minister Lee urged our alliance managers to continue 
to conduct their business well. 
 
¶20.  (U) DASD Sedney has cleared this message. 
STEPHENS
</file>