^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1670  |  2009-10-21  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 21일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001670

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 21일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/16 12:54//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
外高, 국제고로 전환 추진;정부 ＂內申 중심 선발＂… 교총은 외고 폐지 반대, 논란 확산

중앙일보
선생님을 확 바꿨더니 학생 성적·자부심 ‘빵빵’

동아일보, 한겨레 신문, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
전공노, 합법노조 지위 상실

한국일보
글로벌 환율 전쟁/ 버냉키 Fed의장, 원화 지목 추가절상 우회 압박

===== 국내 동향 =====

게이츠 국방부 장관은 2012년 4월로 예정된 전시작전통제권 전환 시한에 맞춰 미국에서 한국으로 이양될 것으로 확신한다고 설명했다. 그는 또 “북한의 미사일 도발 등에 대비한 MD 체제 구축 문제를 한국과 일본 정부와 계속 추진해 나가겠다”고 말했다. (전체)

북한에서 대남관계를 책임지고 있는 김양건 노동당 통일전선부장이 20일 복귀하기에 앞서 지난 15일부터 닷새 동안 중국 베이징에 머물렀다. 그와 한국 당국자(이상득)가 청와대의 부인에도 비밀 접촉을 했을 가능성이 제기된다. (전체)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

벤 버냉키 미 연방준비제도이사회(Fed) 의장은 19일(현지시간) 한국과 중국 등 아시아 주요 경제국의 수출주도 성장정책이 국제무역 불균형을 심화시키고 해당국 경제의 지속적인 성장을 저해할 수 있다고 경고했다. (전체)

이번 발언은 한국을 비롯한 아시아 수출 국가에 대해 달러 대비 자국(원·달러) 환율의 평가 절상을 압박하는 것으로 비춰질 수 있다. (한국, 한겨레)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

대다수 신문은 정례 브리핑에서 나온 이언 켈리의 19일 발언 내용을 언급하였다. "샌디에이고에서 열리는 '동북아시아 협력대화(NEACD)'에 미 당국자들도 참석할 계획이다고 말했다. 신문들은 리근 북한 외무성 미국 국장도 10월 26~27일 열리는 동 모임에 참석할 예정이라며 양국 사이 비공식 대면 접촉 가능성을 제기하였다.

특히 중도 우파 중앙일보는 성김 6자회담 특별대표가 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 평양 방문을 비롯한 북미 양자 회담 일정을 잡기 위해 리근과 회동할 수 있다는 워싱턴 소식통의 발언을 전했다.

==== 아프간 원조 ====

보수 한국 신문은 아프가니스탄 경제 원조를 요청한 제프 모렐 미 국방성 대변인의 발언에 대한 반응으로 세계 10위권 경제 대국의 위상에 맞춰 아프가니스탄 경제 원조를 확대하라고 정부에 요청하였다.

조선일보 사설: "아프간 전쟁이 발발한 2003년부터 지금까지 한국은 1억3000여만달러를 지원해 세계 지원액의 0.2%를 차지하고 있다. …이런 한·미관계의 특수성을 감안하면 한국의 아프간 지원규모가 인색하다는 소리를 들을 만하다."

동아일보 사설 주장: "아프간 지원에는 물론 위험이 따른다. 아프간에 의료 공병부대를 파견한 이후 우리 장병 1명이 테러로 숨졌고, 민간인 23명이 탈레반에 납치돼 2명이 살해되는 비극을 겪었다. …세계 평화와 안정을 위해 우리가 기여한 만큼 국제사회도 한반도 평화정착 노력에 동참할 것이다. 아프간 지원은 한미 동맹관계에도 긍정적 영향을 미친다. 정부는 늦어도 다음 달 버락 오바마 대통령 방한 때까지 구체적인 지원방안을 마련할 필요가 있다."

중앙일보도 비슷하게 <[사설] 아프간 재정 지원 확대 전향적으로 검토하자>란 제하의 기사를 게재했다.

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/20/2009102001772.html|[양상훈 칼럼] 주한미군 철수해야 북핵 포기하겠다면]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 21일, 38면)

양상훈 논설위원

이번에는 "혹시" 했던 국제사회의 북핵 대응이 "역시"로 가고 있다. 중국이 북핵 폐기를 위해 북한 체제를 위태롭게 하는 일은 하지 않겠다는 뜻이 명확한 이상 북한이 궁지에 몰려 핵을 버릴 것이란 희망은 기적을 바라는 것이나 마찬가지란 사실이 다시 한번 확인됐다.

이런 상황에서 이명박 대통령의 일괄 타결 구상이나 미국의 포괄적 타결 구상은 아직은 먼 일로만 느껴진다. 그러나 북핵 폐기는 어떤 경우든 북한이 항복하는 형식이 아니라 한반도 정세를 근본적으로 바꿀 대타결의 상황에서 이뤄질 수밖에 없는 것은 사실이다. 북한이 경제 지원 정도를 받고 생명과도 같은 핵을 포기할 것으로 본다면 너무나 안이한 생각이다. 이 대타결 국면에서 우리는 매우 곤란하지만 피하기 어려운 정치·군사적 문제와 맞닥뜨려야 한다.

김정일은 원자바오 중국 총리와 만난 자리에서 북·미 회담 결과에 따라 6자회담에 복귀할 뜻을 밝히면서 "북·미 간 적대관계가 바뀌어야 한다"는 핵 문제 해결의 전제 조건을 분명히 했다. 그에 대한 설명은 북한 노동당 기관지 노동신문이 했다. 노동신문은 북핵 문제 해결의 기본 원칙은 미국이 북한에 대한 적대시 정책을 철회하고 정전협정을 평화협정으로 바꾸는 것이라면서 미·북 간 평화협정을 한반도 비핵화를 실현하기 위한 "가장 합리적이고 실천적인 방도의 하나"라고 했다.

북한이 말하는 미국의 대북 적대시 정책 철회와 미·북 간 평화협정 체결은 한·미 동맹을 종료하고 주한미군을 철수하라는 것이다. 일부 보도에 따르면 북한은 미국의 오바마 행정부 출범 직후인 지난 1월과 2월 평양을 방문했던 미국의 전직 관료와 북한문제 전문가들에게 '과감한 딜'을 하자면서 '북한은 핵을 포기하고 미국은 대북 적대시 정책의 종료, 한국에 대한 핵우산 제거와 한·미 동맹을 끝내는 방안'을 제시했다고 한다.

… 유명환 외교통상부 장관은 지난달 18일 대한상의에서 열린 '최근 한반도 주변 정세와 북핵 문제 전망' 간담회에서 "북한의 핵무기는 남한을 겨냥한 것"이라며 "북한이 얘기하는 대북 적대시 정책 철회는 미·북 평화협정과 그에 따른 주한미군 철수"라고 했다.

우리 정부의 입장은 "북한이 한·미가 받을 리 없는 주한미군 철수를 요구한다면 그것은 핵 포기를 거부하기 위해 내놓는 핑계일 뿐"이라는 것이다. 실제 그럴 가능성이 있다. 하지만 미국이 주한미군 주둔을 위해 북핵을 어쩔 수 없는 것으로 받아들이리라는 보장도 없다.

북한은 핵을 포기하고 미국은 주한미군을 철수하는 문제에 대해 미국 정부가 구체적인 입장을 내놓은 적은 없다. 겉으로 내놓는 미국의 공식 입장이 무엇이건 간에 미국이 북핵 제거와 주한미군 주둔 중 어느 것이 더 미국의 국익에 부합하는지를 한번쯤 비교해 보게 될 것임은 틀림없는 사실이다. 미국이 주한미군 없이도 한반도 전쟁 억지가 "가능하다"는 판단을 내리게 되면 북핵과 주한미군을 교환하는 거래는 가상의 차원에서 현실의 문제로 대두할 수도 있다.

미군 전력이 점차 해·공군 위주로 바뀌고 있고 주일미군과 괌 기지가 있는 상황에서 반드시 한국에 지상 기지가 있어야 한다는 주장이 힘을 잃어갈 수도 있다. 그런 점에서 요즘 미국에서 "북핵 문제는 상호 적대적인 입장으로는 절대 해결될 수 없다"(로버트 칼린 전 국무부 정보조사국 담당관)는 식의 말들이 많이 나오는 것도 그냥 흘려 들을 것만은 아니다.

중국과 러시아는 주한미군 철수를 무조건 환영할 것이라고 볼 수는 없으나 결국은 주한미군이 있는 것보다는 없는 것이 낫다는 판단으로 기울 것이다. 일본도 북핵보다는 주한미군 철수를 받아들일 가능성이 있다. …

우리 입장에서 북핵 제거보다는 전쟁 억지가 더 눈 앞의 국익이다. 이를 본능적으로 알고 있는 우리 사회에서 북핵과 주한미군의 상관 관계에 대한 논의를 꺼려하는 것도 무리가 아니다. 그러나 이런 자세가 대북 협상에서 언제까지나 우리의 급소이자 근본적 약점이 될 것도 분명한 사실이다.

주한미군이 없으면 전쟁 불안이 일고 북핵이 없어지지 않으면 핵공포 속에 통일은 불가능해진다. 이 딜레마는 우리가 피하고 싶다고 피할 수 있는 것이 아니다. '한반도의 항구적 평화체제에 관한 협상'은 6자회담의 2005년 9·19 공동성명과 2007년 2·13 합의에 모두 명문화돼 있다. 고통스럽지만 피할 수 없는 현실이 눈앞에 닥치기 전에 어디에선가는 통일 상황까지를 염두에 둔 장기적 전략 검토와 대응 준비가 이뤄지고 있어야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://news.donga.com/3//20091021/23576483/1|[시론/김성한]전작권 ‘2012 프로젝트’ 가동을]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 21일, 39면; 발췌)

김성한 고려대 국제대학원 교수 국제정치

한국의 선택지는 세 가지다. 첫째, 경제적 상황이나 북핵 문제를 비롯한 제반 여건이 여의치 않으니 전작권 전환 문제를 조속히 재검토(revisit)하여 한미연합사 체제를 유지하도록 하는 방안이다. 둘째, 능력을 갖추기 위해 최선을 다하되 북핵 문제와 직접적으로 연관시키지 않고 예정된 시점에 전작권을 전환하는 것이다. 셋째, 능력을 갖춰나가고 2012년까지 북핵 문제를 해결하기 위해 최선을 다하되 능력과 조건이 충족되지 않을 경우 전작권 전환 시기를 조정하는 것이다. 

첫 번째 방안은 능력과 조건이 성숙될 가능성이 희박함을 솔직히 인정하고 대안을 강구하는 이점이 있으나 미국에 레버리지(협상우위)를 주게 되어 한미연합사 체제 유지에 대한 대가를 미국이 한국에 요구할 가능성이 있다. 전작권 문제와 아프가니스탄 파병, 미사일 방어, 주한미군 규모의 문제가 혼재되어 소모적 형태의 밀고 당기기를 재연할 경우 어렵사리 회복한 한미 간의 신뢰마저 손상될 가능성이 있다. 둘째 방안은 미국에 불필요한 레버리지를 주지 않는 장점이 있으나 국방비 증액에도 불구하고 북핵 문제가 악화된 상태에서 전작권 전환이 이뤄질 경우 북한에 그릇된 메시지를 주는 단점이 있다. 한국 내에서 핵 보유를 요구하는 목소리도 커질 것이다.

셋째 방안은 ‘2012 프로젝트’로 부를 수 있다. 어떻게 운용하느냐에 따라 결과가 달라질 수 있으므로 충분히 시도해봄 직한 방안이다. ‘국방개혁 2020’을 중장기 전략에 맞게 수정한 후 효율성을 제고하는 방향으로 추진한다면 국방비를 대폭 증액하지 않아도 2012년 전작권 전환에 필요한 능력을 갖출 수 있다. 북핵 문제 역시 “김정일 정권이 존속하는 한 해결이 힘들다”는 식의 소극적인 사고를 버리고 우리 정부가 앞장서서 대화와 압박의 청사진을 제시하고 남북관계와 대외관계를 주도해 나간다면 해결되지 말라는 법도 없다. 최선을 다했음에도 불구하고 2012년 전작권 전환을 6개월 정도 앞둔 시점에 한미 양국 정상이 만나 한국의 능력과 한반도의 정치적 조건이 여의치 않다고 판단한다면 상호 합의하에 전환 시기를 조정하면 된다.

**[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/20/2009102001782.html|[사설] 한국의 아프간 지원의 당위성과 그 한계]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 21일, 39면)

제프 모렐 미국 국방부 대변인은 18일 "평화와 번영을 바라고 경제적 성장을 유지하려는 미국과 한국, 일본 등 모든 나라는 아프가니스탄을 지원해야 할 의무가 있다"고 말했다. 다른 미 정부 당국자는 "한국은 의료지원 등을 해 왔으나 다른 분야 기여도 있으면 좋겠다"며 "결정은 빠르면 빠를수록, 규모는 클수록 좋다"고 했다.

지난 4월 방한했던 리처드 홀브룩 국무부 아프가니스탄·파키스탄 담당 특사는 당시 한국의 지원에 사의(謝意)를 표하는 방식으로 추가 지원 필요성을 시사했으나 직설적으로 지원 확대 이야기를 꺼내지는 않았었다.

그러던 미국이 "아프가니스탄 지원 확대는 한국 정부 스스로 결정할 일"이라던 종전 태도를 바꿔 이른 시일 안에 결정을 내려달라고 요청하고 나섰다. 그만큼 아프간 사정이 다급해진 것이다. 아프가니스탄에는 미군 6만8000여명과 40여개국 4만여명의 병력이 주둔하고 있다. 탈레반의 저항이 완강해지면서 미군을 비롯한 파병 국가들의 인명 손실이 급증하고 있다.

현지 미군 사령관은 최근 오바마 대통령에게 대규모 추가 파병 없이는 임무 수행이 어렵다며 병력 증파를 요청했다. 여기에다 지난 8월 치른 대선 결과가 부정선거 논란 끝에 번복되는 헌정(憲政) 위기까지 겹쳐 상황이 더 악화하고 있다. 이에 따라 파병 국가 중에 철군을 계획 중인 나라가 점차 늘고 있다.

한국은 2007년 여름 20여명의 선교봉사단 집단 피랍(被拉) 사태 직후 의료·공병 부대를 철군시켰고 그 뒤론 파병을 하지 않고 있다. 미국도 당시 한국민이 받은 충격이 워낙 컸던 점을 감안해 파병 요청을 삼가왔다. 한국 내 여론은 파병에 부정적인 의견이 여전히 압도적이다.

그러나 비군사적 지원에는 달리 생각해야 할 점이 많다. 우리 정부는 지난해 6월 파리 '아프간 원조공여국 회의'에서 올해부터 2011년까지 3300만달러를 지원하겠다고 약속했다. 당시 회의에서 각국이 밝힌 지원 규모는 영국 12억달러, 독일 6억4000만달러, 일본 5억5000만달러였다. 아프간 전쟁이 발발한 2003년부터 지금까지 한국은 1억3000여만달러를 지원해 세계 지원액의 0.2%를 차지하고 있다. 주한미군은 2만8000여명으로, 이라크와 아프가니스탄을 빼면 독일(5만8000여명), 일본(3만3000여명)에 이어 3번째로 많다. 독일과 일본에 주둔하는 미군은 해당 국가 방위만을 위해 존재한다고 보기 어려운 반면 주한미군은 지난 60년간 북한 도발을 제1선에서 막는 방파제 역할을 맡아 왔다.

이런 한·미관계의 특수성을 감안하면 한국의 아프간 지원규모가 인색하다는 소리를 들을 만하다. 한미동맹과 세계 10위권 경제대국으로서 국제 테러와의 전쟁에 참여한다는 측면에서 한국의 기여를 늘릴 필요가 있다. 미국 역시 그에 앞서 아프간 문제를 앞으로 어떤 시간표에 따라 어떻게 풀어갈 것인가 하는 청사진을 내놓아야 한다. 

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://news.donga.com/Column/Sasul/3/040109/20091021/23576522/2|[사설]아프간 평화 위해 힘 보태야]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 21일 39면)

아프가니스탄전쟁이 오늘로 개전(開戰) 8년 14일을 넘긴다. 공동번영과 평화를 추구하는 21세기에 6년 6개월이나 싸웠던 이라크전쟁과 6년 2일 동안 지속된 제2차 세계대전보다 훨씬 긴 전쟁이 계속되고 있다. 아프간전쟁은 글로벌 시대의 인류가 풀어야 할 공통의 과제다. 주요 20개국(G20)과 경제협력개발기구(OECD) 회원국으로서 세계 10위권의 경제력을 가진 한국도 당연히 아프간 평화 정착을 위해 힘을 보태야 한다. 미국을 비롯한 42개국이 아프간에 군대를 보내 탈레반과 전쟁을 벌이고 있다. 국제사회에 대한 기여와 역할에 따라 국가 위상이 달라지는 세계화 시대에 우리가 구경만 하고 있을 수는 없다. 

내일과 모레 서울에서 한미 군사위원회(MCM)와 안보협의회(SCM)가 열린다. 미 국방부 관계자들은 “한국의 아프간 지원은 빠르면 빠를수록, 규모는 클수록 좋다”는 말로 양국 국방책임자들이 아프간 문제를 논의할 것임을 예고했다. 미국의 요청에 수동적으로 응하기보다는 세계 평화를 위해 자발적으로 국력에 걸맞은 기여를 하겠다는 적극적인 자세를 보여야 할 것이다. 

정부는 5월 아프간 바그람 미 공군기지 병원 신축, 민간재건팀(PRT) 증원, 경제지원 확대를 약속했다. 그래도 세계 각국이 약속한 아프간 지원 가운데 우리의 부담액은 0.13%에 불과하다. 내년까지 계획을 모두 실행해도 누적지원액은 1억 달러가 채 안 된다. 일본의 20억 달러 지원과 비교하면 초라한 수준이다. 경제지원 대폭 확대가 어려우면 의료, 경찰 및 민간인 직업훈련, 장비 제공 등 기존 지원사업의 규모를 키울 필요가 있다. 지원 활동을 펴는 우리 국민을 보호하기 위해 경비 병력을 보내는 방안도 검토할 수 있을 것이다. 

아프간 지원에는 물론 위험이 따른다. 아프간에 의료 공병부대를 파견한 이후 우리 장병 1명이 테러로 숨졌고, 민간인 23명이 탈레반에 납치돼 2명이 살해되는 비극을 겪었다. 그렇다고 해서 아프간을 회피하기만 하면 우리는 국제사회에서 발언권을 얻기 어렵다. 아프간은 6·25전쟁 때 우리처럼 외부지원이 절실한 곳이다. 아프간 지원은 우리가 국제사회에 진 빚을 갚는 일이기도 하다.

세계 평화와 안정을 위해 우리가 기여한 만큼 국제사회도 한반도 평화정착 노력에 동참할 것이다. 아프간 지원은 한미 동맹관계에도 긍정적 영향을 미친다. 정부는 늦어도 다음 달 버락 오바마 대통령 방한 때까지 구체적인 지원방안을 마련할 필요가 있다. 

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3834661|[사설] 북핵 본격 협상 앞두고 한·미 공조 삐걱대나]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 21일, 46면)

한·미 양국의 ‘북핵외교’에 엇박자가 잦아지고 있다. 지난주 미 국방부는 북한이 남북 정상회담을 제의했다고 밝혔다. 깜짝 놀란 우리 정부는 사실상 무의미한 제안이라는 점을 미국에 설명했는데 미 정부가 잘못 전달했다면서 정정을 요청했다. 그러자 며칠 뒤 미 백악관 대변인이 미 정부 안에 의사소통 잘못이 있었다고 밝힘으로써 소동이 무마됐다.

이에 앞서 지난달 하순 유엔총회 참석차 미국을 방문한 이명박 대통령은 우리의 독자적인 북핵문제 해법으로 ‘그랜드 바긴’ 방안을 발표했다. 우리 정부가 야심 차게 발표한 정책을 두고 미 정부 관계자들은 잘 모르는 일이라거나 보고받지 못했다며 시큰둥한 반응을 보였다. 그러자 청와대는 사전에 미 정부에 ‘그랜드 바긴’ 방안을 설명했는데 미 정부 안에서 의사소통이 잘 이뤄지지 않아 생긴 일이라며 수습하느라 진땀을 뺐다. 며칠 뒤 이 대통령이 다시 미 정부의 ‘아무개’가 모르는 것이 대수냐고 말했고 바로 그 ‘아무개’였던 캠벨 미 국무차관보는 아시아 각국을 순방하면서 한국은 외면했다. ‘물샐틈없는 북핵 공조’를 강조해온 한·미 양국이 불과 한 달 사이에 잇따라 엇박자를 내면서 양국 사이에 문제가 발생한 것 아니냐는 추측이 무성해지고 있다. 걱정스럽다.

북한 핵문제가 발생한 이래 20년 가까이 한·미 정부는 언제나 ‘찰떡 공조’의 중요성을 강조했다. 그러나 실상은 말과는 달랐다. 1990년대 중반 1차 핵위기 직후 김영삼 대통령은 빌 클린턴 미 대통령과 핵문제 해결 방안의 명칭을 ‘일괄타결’로 하느냐, ‘포괄적 타결’로 하느냐를 두고 몇 시간 동안 입씨름을 벌였다. 김대중 대통령은 조지 부시 대통령과 북한에 대한 기본 입장 차이로 재임기간 내내 갈등을 빚었다. 노무현 대통령 시절도 마찬가지였다. 그 사이 북한은 핵실험을 강행했다.

한·미 양국에 새 정부가 들어서고 북한이 2차 핵실험을 강행하면서 양국 공조는 눈에 띄게 호전됐다. 핵확산 방지에 대외정책의 최우선 순위를 두는 오바마 미 정부와 북핵문제에 강경 입장인 이명박 정부는 양국 간 긴밀한 공조가 이뤄지고 있음을 기회 있을 때마다 강조해온 것부터가 그렇다. 실제로도 유엔 안전보장이사회의 제재 결의 채택, 6자회담 참가국 중 북한을 제외한 ‘5자협의’ 과정에서 한·미 간 긴밀한 협력이 상당한 성과를 거둔 것으로 평가됐다. 그러나 정작 북·미 대화가 임박한 중요 시점에 양국 간 공조 전선에 이상음이 들리니 우려를 낳는 것이다.

지금까지의 엇박자는 양국이 서둘러 진화함으로써 일단 수면 아래로 들어갔다. 지금부터가 문제다. 최근 소동들이 한·미 정부 간 정책 협의가 원활하지 않고 서로에 대한 신뢰문제에서 비롯된 것은 아닌지 양국 모두 꼼꼼하게 점검할 필요가 있다. 한·미 공조에 틈이 생긴다면 그걸 북한이 모를 리 없다. 북한이 그 틈바구니를 비집고 나올 경우 곧 본격화될 북핵협상은 험난할 수밖에 없다. 작금의 불협화음을 결코 가볍게 여기지 말고 한·미 공조를 더욱 탄탄하게 다져가는 계기로 삼아야 할 것이다.

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3834662|[사설] 아프간 재정 지원 확대 전향적으로 검토하자]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 21일, 46면: 발췌)

미국이 아프가니스탄에 대한 한국의 재정적 지원을 기대한다는 뜻을 밝혔다. 오늘 방한하는 로버트 게이츠 국방장관을 수행 중인 제프 모렐 대변인은 그제 한국 기자들과 만난 자리에서 “군사 지원이 어렵고 정치적으로 감당이 되지 않는 나라들은 적어도 재정적 지원을 할 수 있을 것”이라고 말했다. …한국으로부터 아프간 파병을 이끌어내기는 어렵다고 보고, 금전적 지원이라도 더 얻어내겠다는 뜻으로 해석할 수 있겠지만 그게 다는 아니라고 본다. …

현지 사령관은 대규모 병력 증파를 요구하고 있지만 버락 오바마 대통령은 결정을 못한 채 고심을 거듭하고 있다. 월남전의 악몽이 되살아나면서 철군 여론도 높아지고 있다. 오바마 정부의 아프간 전략 자체가 갈피를 못 잡고 있는 상황에서 동맹국에 파병 요청을 하기가 어렵게 돼 있는 것이다.

우리에게 아프간 파병은 ‘뜨거운 감자’다. 동맹국으로서의 의리도 의리지만 국제사회의 책임 있는 일원으로서의 의무도 저버릴 수 없기 때문이다. 미국도 내놓고 군사적 기여를 요구하긴 부담스러운 입장이다. 이런 상황에서 미국이 먼저 재정적 기여 쪽으로 가닥을 잡아줌으로써 한국 정부의 부담을 덜어준 측면이 없지 않아 보인다.

… 파병 문제는 일단 뒤로 제쳐놓는다 치더라도 재정적 지원만큼은 한국의 국제적 위상에 걸맞게 확대할 필요가 있다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1670.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 21, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
ROKG Seeks to Transform Foreign Language High Schools 
into International High Schools 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Principal's Passion Leads "Bottom-tier" High School to Make 
Significant Improvement in College Entrance Tests 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun, Segye Ilbo, 
Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
ROKG Denies Legitimate Status of Civil Servant Union 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Global Currency War; U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke 
Indirectly Pressures ROK for Currency Appreciation 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
Defense Secretary Robert Gates, on his way to Japan yesterday, said 
that he is sure that Seoul and Washington will meet the April 2012 
deadline for the transfer of wartime operational control from the 
U.S. and the ROK. He also said that (the U.S.) will continue to 
pursue missile defense partnerships with the ROK and Japan to brace 
for missile provocations from North Korea. (All) 
 
Kim Yang-gon, North Korea's point man on the ROK as Director of the 
United Front Department at the North's Workers' Party, stayed in 
Beijing for six days before returning home yesterday. There is 
speculation about possible s-e-c-r-e-t contact between him and an 
ROK official, despite the Blue House's denial. (All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke warned on Oct. 19 that 
pursuit of export-led growth by Asian nations, including the ROK and 
China, could lead to a reemergence of global trade imbalances and 
undercut efforts to achieve more durable growth. (All) 
 
This remark can be seen as U.S. pressure on Asian exporters, 
including the ROK, to appreciate their currencies against the 
dollar. (Hankook, Hankyoreh) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
Most newspapers noted Oct. 19 press remarks by State Department 
Spokesman Ian Kelly, in which he said: "There will be American 
officials at this meeting (the Northeast Asia Cooperative Dialogue 
(NEACD)) in San Diego."  They noted Ri Gun, Director General of 
American Affairs at North Korea's Foreign Ministry, will also attend 
the Oct. 26-27 meeting, and raised the possibility of an unofficial 
one-on-one contact between the two countries. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo, in particular, commented from 
Washington that diplomatic sources in Washington are closely looking 
at the possibility that Sung Kim, U.S. Special Envoy for the 
Six-Party Talks, may meet with Ri Gun to make arrangements for 
bilateral negotiations, including a visit to Pyongyang by Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth. 
 
-Aid for Afghanistan 
-------------------- 
 
SEOUL 00001670  002 OF 007 
 
 
In response to Pentagon Spokesman Geoff Morrell's Oct. 18 remarks 
asking for economic aid to Afghanistan, conservative ROK newspapers 
urged Seoul to expand aid to the war-torn country in line with its 
status as the world's 11th largest economy. 
 
Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "From 2003 - when the Afghan war broke 
out - until now, the ROK has sent some $130 million to Afghanistan, 
which accounts for nearly 0.2 percent of the entire amount 
contributed by other countries. ...  Given our special relationship 
with the U.S., this level of aid can be called stingy." 
 
Dong-a Ilbo editorial stated: "Aid to Afghanistan, of course, 
entails danger.  After the ROK's medical unit was dispatched to 
Afghanistan, one ROK soldier was killed in a terrorist attack, and 
23 ROK civilians were kidnapped by the Taliban, two of them slain. 
...  If we contribute to world peace and stability, the 
international community will also join the efforts to establish 
peace on the Korean Peninsula.  Assistance to Afghanistan has a 
positive impact on the ROK-U.S. alliance.  The ROK needs to come up 
with specific ways to provide aid to Afghanistan before U.S. 
President Barack Obama visits Seoul next month." 
 
JoongAng Ilbo filed a similar editorial entitled "Need to Consider 
Expanding Financial Aid to Afghanistan in a Forward-looking Manner" 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
S. KOREA'S PAINFUL DILEMMA 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 21, 2009, page 38) 
 
By Editorial writer Yang Sang-hoon 
 
No breakthrough seems likely in the North Korean nuclear issue now 
that China has made it clear that it will not risk endangering the 
North Korean system for the sake of denuclearization, making it 
improbable that the international community will be able to pressure 
Pyongyang into giving up its nuclear weapons program. 
 
President Lee Myung-bak's idea of a "grand bargain" and U.S. 
President Barack Obama's "comprehensive package" will make little 
difference.  But the North must be persuaded to denuclearize, not as 
a surrender but as a big compromise that will fundamentally change 
the situation on the Korean Peninsula.  It is naive to expect the 
North to give up its nuclear arms, which it considers a matter of 
life and death, in return for economic aid. In the course reaching a 
compromise, Seoul has to confront very difficult but unavoidable 
political and military problems. 
 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il told Chinese premier Wen Jiabao that 
one condition for his return to Six-Party Talks is an end to 
"hostile" policies from the U.S.  The official Rodong Shinmun daily 
said that includes converting the armistice agreement into a peace 
treaty.  That would be "one of the most rational and practical 
means" of achieving a denuclearized peninsula, it added. 
 
But this also calls for an end to the U.S.-ROK alliance and 
withdrawal of the U.S. Forces Korea.  The North reportedly proposed 
a "bold deal" to former American officials and North Korea 
specialists who visited Pyongyang in January and February.  The 
North would abandon its nuclear weapons program if the U.S. removes 
the nuclear umbrella it provides for the ROK and puts an end to the 
U.S.-ROK alliance. 
 
Foreign Minister Yoo Myung-hwan told a Korea Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry gathering on Sept. 18 that the North's nuclear weapons 
target the ROK, and that the North wants a Washington-Pyongyang 
peace agreement and a withdrawal of the U.S. Forces Korea. 
 
The government says this is just a mere excuse for North Korea not 
to abandon its nuclear program.  But there is no guarantee that the 
U.S. will accept a nuclear-armed North Korea for the sake of keeping 
forces in the ROK. 
 
SEOUL 00001670  003 OF 007 
 
 
 
The U.S. government has said nothing specific.  Whatever official 
stance Washington takes, it will undoubtedly weigh which of the two, 
eliminating the North Korean nuclear threat or keeping forces in the 
ROK, matters more.  If the U.S. judges that it can prevent a war on 
the Korean Peninsula without troops in the ROK, then the withdrawal 
of the USFK could emerge as a real option. 
 
Given that the priority in the U.S. military strategy is gradually 
shifting to the Navy and Air Force, and that the U.S. maintains 
military bases in Japan and Guam, the case for keeping the USFK may 
well weaken.  Robert Carlin, a former East Asia expert at the State 
Department, recently said the nuclear issue cannot be resolved 
through "mutual hostility." 
 
China and Russia may not unconditionally welcome a withdrawal of the 
USFK but will eventually find it preferable to their continued 
presence.  Japan may also opt for a withdrawal of the USFK over a 
nuclear-armed North Korea. 
 
From the ROK's perspective, preventing a war is more important to 
the national interest than eliminating North Korea's nuclear 
weapons.  It is natural that there is no discussion here about the 
link between the North's nuclear weapons and the USFK.  But that 
will remain a weakness in negotiations with the North. 
 
The withdrawal of the USFK would spark fears of a war, but 
reunification becomes impossible unless the North gives up its 
nuclear weapons.  This is a dilemma the ROK must confront. 
Negotiations on a permanent peace treaty for the Korean Peninsula 
are stipulated in the Sept. 19, 2005 statement of principles and the 
Feb. 13, 2007 agreement adopted in the Six-Party Talks.  It is a 
high time to start mulling a long-term strategy with reunification 
in mind and prepare to confront the painful reality. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
"2012" PROJECT FOR WARTIME COMMAND SHIFT SHOULD BE PUT IN MOTION 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 21, 2009, Page 39; Excerpts) 
 
By Kim Sung-han, professor of international politics at Korea 
University Graduate School of International Studies 
 
Regarding the transfer of wartime operational control of ROK troops 
from the U.S. to the ROK, Seoul has three options.  The first one is 
to revisit the issue as soon as possible and maintain the ROK-U.S. 
Combined Forces Command (CFC) on the grounds that economic 
conditions are not ripe for the wartime command shift as well as the 
fact that other circumstances, including the North Korean nuclear 
issue, do not make the transfer  appropriate.  The second option is 
to make every effort to be capable of taking back the wartime 
operational control as scheduled, but not to directly link the issue 
with the North Korean nuclear standoff.  The third option is for the 
ROK to achieve capability of taking over wartime operational control 
and making every effort to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue by 
2012. However, if the ROK is not able to do this or (certain) 
conditions are not met, the timetable for transfer of wartime 
command should be changed. 
 
If the ROK chooses the first option, it can frankly admit that there 
is a remote possibility that the ROK's capability and other 
conditions may be ripe for the OPCON transfer, but it could give the 
U.S. leverage in negotiations, thereby leading Washington to demand 
rewards for maintaining the CFC.  If the ROK and the U.S. waste 
their time and energy in another tug of war over wartime command 
shift, coupled with other issues like troop dispatches to 
Afghanistan, missile defense, and the USFK realignment, it could 
undermine trust between the two nations, which have been restored 
with difficulty.  If the ROK chooses the second option, then the 
U.S. would not be provided with unnecessary leverage.  However, if 
the OPCON transfer comes when the North Korean nuclear issue is 
aggravated despite the ROK's defense budget increase, it could send 
 
SEOUL 00001670  004 OF 007 
 
 
a wrong message to North Korea.  A call for the ROK's nuclear 
possession would also grow louder. 
 
The third option can be called the "2012 Project."  This is totally 
worth trying because its result depends on how to manage the 
project.  If we revise the "Defense Reform 2020" plan from a mid- 
and long-term perspective to enhance its efficiency, we could be 
capable of the OPCON transfer in 2012 without any drastic defense 
budget increase.  The North Korean nuclear issue can also be 
resolved if the ROKG abandons its passive mindset of "As long as the 
Kim Jong-il regime is in place, it is difficult to resolve the 
nuclear issue" and takes an active role in leading its inter-Korean 
and foreign relations by presenting a blueprint of dialogue and 
pressure.  Despite our efforts, if the ROK and the U.S. judge six 
months ahead of the scheduled date for the OPCON transfer that the 
ROK's capability and the political conditions on the Korean 
Peninsula are not appropriate, they can change the date based on 
mutual agreement. 
 
 
KOREA SHOULD GIVE MORE SUPPORT FOR AFGHANISTAN 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 21, 2009, page 39) 
 
U.S. Defense Department spokesman Geoff Morrell on Sunday said all 
countries that wish for the peace and prosperity and economic growth 
of the world have an "obligation" to support Afghanistan.  Another 
U.S. government official said it would be better for the ROK, which 
has provided medical support for Afghanistan until now, to make 
contributions to other sectors as well, adding that the quicker the 
ROK decides and the bigger its support, the better. 
 
When he visited the ROK in April, Richard Holbrooke, U.S. Special 
Envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan in the Barack Obama 
Administration, mentioned the need for additional support from 
Seoul.  But he was not as frank in expressing the scale of support 
Washington wants. 
 
However, it is clear that Washington has changed its stance of 
leaving it up to Seoul to decide whether to expand its support for 
Afghanistan and wants an answer.  The situation in Afghanistan has 
become more pressing.  There are around 68,000 American soldiers 
there and another 40,000 troops from some 40 other countries.  The 
number of soldiers either killed or wounded in Afghanistan is rising 
rapidly as the Taliban resistance intensifies. 
 
The top U.S. military commander in Afghanistan has asked for more 
troops, saying it would be difficult to achieve his mission without 
a massive increase.  The situation in Afghanistan has grown worse 
after the presidential election on Aug. 20 was overturned due to 
allegations of vote rigging.  As a result, a growing number of 
countries which have dispatched troops to Afghanistan are planning 
to pull out. 
 
In the summer of 2007, a group of Korean missionaries were abducted 
in Afghanistan, leading to the withdrawal of Korean medical and 
engineering troops.  Seoul has not dispatched any troops to 
Afghanistan since then, and the U.S. government has refrained from 
asking it to deploy troops there, mindful of the shock the country 
suffered due to the abductions.  Most Koreans are still opposed to 
the deployment of troops to Afghanistan. 
 
But things are different when it comes to offering non-military 
support.  At a meeting in Paris in June of donor countries, the 
government pledged US$33 million until 2011.  The U.K. pledged $1.2 
billion, Germany $640 million and Japan $550 million.  From 2003 - 
when the Afghan war broke out - until now, the ROK has sent some 
$130 million to Afghanistan, which accounts for nearly 0.2 percent 
of the entire amount contributed by other countries. There are 
around 28,000 U.S. troops in Korea, making it home to the 
third-largest overseas contingent of American soldiers following 
Germany with some 58,000 and Japan with around 33,000.  And the U.S. 
troops in Germany and Japan are not there solely to defend those 
countries against foreign aggression, but over the last 60 years, 
U.S. troops in the ROK have served as the primary deterrent against 
 
SEOUL 00001670  005 OF 007 
 
 
a possible attack from North Korea. 
 
Given our special relationship with the U.S., this level of aid can 
be called stingy.  (The ROK) needs to boost its contribution to 
Afghanistan in light of its participation in the international war 
on terrorism.  But the U.S. government must first present a 
blueprint for how it intends to resolve the problems there. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
ROK SHOULD CONTRIBUTE TO AFGHAN PEACE 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 21, 2009, Page 39) 
 
Today marks eight years and 14 days since the war in Afghanistan 
broke out.  Despite the 21st century's pursuit for co-prosperity and 
peace, the war in Afghanistan has lasted a great deal longer than 
the war in Iraq, which lasted for six years and six months, and the 
Second World War, which continued for six years and two days.  In 
this global era, the war in Afghanistan is a task which the all of 
humanity should work together to solve.  As a member of the G20 and 
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and 
as the world's tenth largest economy, the ROK should extend a 
helping hand to establish peace in Afghanistan.  A total of 42 
nations, including the U.S., have sent troops to Afghanistan to 
fight against the Taliban.  In this global era, in which a country's 
national status is dependent on that nation's contribution to and 
role in the international community, we cannot simply sit back and 
watch the war. 
 
The Military Committee Meeting (MCM) and Security Consultative 
Meeting (SCM) between the ROK and the U.S. will be held in Seoul on 
October 21 and 22.  Pentagon officials hinted that defense officials 
on both sides will discuss the Afghan issue, saying, "When it comes 
to the ROK's aid to Afghanistan, the quicker and bigger, the 
better."  Instead of accepting Washington's request in a passive 
manner, the ROK should actively make a voluntary contribution to 
world peace that befits its national power. 
 
In May, the ROKG pledged to build a hospital at Bagram Air Base, 
increase its staff in the Provincial Reconstruction Teams, and 
expand economic aid to the war-torn nation.  Still, the ROK's share 
is only 0.13 percent of all foreign aid promised to Afghanistan. 
Even if we fulfill all our promises by next year, the accumulated 
amount of aid would not exceed $100 million.  This pales in 
comparison to Japan's $2 billion in aid.  If it is difficult to 
greatly expand economic aid, the ROK needs to increase the scale of 
existing aid projects, such as the provision of equipment and 
educational or vocational trainings for medical staff, police, and 
civilians.  It could also consider sending security guards to 
Afghanistan to protect Koreans there. 
 
Aid to Afghanistan, of course, entails danger.  After the ROK's 
medical unit was dispatched to Afghanistan, one ROK soldier was 
killed in a terrorist attack, and 23 ROK civilians were kidnapped by 
the Taliban, two of them slain.  However, if we only try to avoid 
the Afghan issue, we cannot gain a say in the international 
community.  Afghanistan is in desperate need of outside help, as we 
were during the Korean War.  Providing aid to Afghanistan is also a 
way for us to repay the debt we owe to the international community. 
 
 
If we contribute to world peace and stability, the international 
community will also join the efforts to establish peace on the 
Korean Peninsula.  Assistance to Afghanistan has a positive impact 
on the ROK-U.S. alliance.  The ROK needs to come up with specific 
ways to provide aid to Afghanistan before U.S. President Barack 
Obama visits Seoul next month. 
 
 
CRACKS IN ROK-U.S. COOPERATION AHEAD OF FULL-SCALE NEGOTIATIONS ON 
N. KOREA'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 21, 2009, page 46) 
 
SEOUL 00001670  006 OF 007 
 
 
 
The ROK and the U.S. have been out of step over their "nuclear 
diplomacy with North Korea."  Last week, the U.S. Department of 
Defense said that North Korea proposed an inter-Korean summit to the 
ROKG.  The ROKG expressed surprise, saying that it had informed the 
U.S. government that the proposal was meaningless and the U.S. 
government seems to have misunderstood Seoul's position.  Later, 
this controversy was tamped down when the White House spokesman said 
there was miscommunication within the U.S. government. 
 
During a visit to the U.S. to attend the UN General Assembly last 
month, President Lee Myung-bak announced a "grand bargain" to 
resolve the North Korean nuclear issue.  U.S. government officials 
were lackadaisical over the ROKG's ambitious proposal, saying they 
were not aware of or not briefed on the proposal.  The ROKG tried to 
put an end to the controversy, saying that it had explained the 
grand bargain to the U.S. government and there seemed to be 
miscommunication within the U.S. government. A few days later, 
President Lee said, "So what if Mr. So-and-so says he is not aware 
of it."  (As a result,) the Mr. So-and-so, Kurt Campbell, the U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 
skipped the ROK on his Asian tour. The ROK and the U.S., which have 
stressed tight cooperation on the North Korean nuclear issue, seemed 
to be out of synch, setting off rumors that ROK-U.S. relations are 
troubled. 
 
Since the North Korean nuclear issue erupted 20 years ago, the ROK 
and U.S. governments have underscored the importance of their close 
cooperation.  However, their words have not always been true in 
reality.  Shortly after the first nuclear crisis in the mid 1990s, 
then-President Kim Young-sam argued with President Bill Clinton over 
whether their approach to the North Korean nuclear issue should be 
called a "package settlement" or a "comprehensive settlement." 
President Kim Dae-jung had conflicts with President George W. Bush 
over differences in their basic position on North Korea.  President 
Roh Moo-hyun was also at odds with the U.S. administration.  Over 
the course of this time period, North Korea (worked toward and then 
finally) staged a nuclear test. 
 
In the wake of North Korea's second nuclear test, the ROK and U.S. 
governments noticeably improved their bilateral coordination. 
President Obama has put a top priority on nuclear proliferation 
prevention and foreign policies and President Lee has taken a hard 
line on the North Korean nuclear issue.  Both governments have 
emphasized their strong coordination.  In fact, close cooperation 
between the ROK and the U.S. played a considerable role when UN 
Security Council resolution was adopted.  Both countries also showed 
strong cooperation when there were discussions on holding five-party 
talks excluding North Korea.  We are concerned, however, that at a 
crucial moment when U.S.-North Korea talks are imminent, ROK-U.S. 
cooperation is suffering a setback. 
 
The ROK and the U.S. took swift steps to remove discord.  But what 
matters is that both countries need to check thoroughly whether the 
recent spate of controversies resulted from poor coordination and 
lack of trust in each other.  North Korea would try to capitalize on 
any cracks in ROK-U.S. cooperation.  This would jeopardize the 
negotiation process on the North Korean nuclear issue.  The ROK and 
the U.S. should not play down the current discord but step up 
efforts to bolster bilateral coordination. 
 
 
CONSIDERATION OF EXPANDING FINANCIAL AID TO AFGHANISTAN IN A 
FORWARD-LOOKING MANNER 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 21, 2009, page 46: Excerpts) 
 
The U.S. (recently) expressed hope for the ROK to provide financial 
aid to Afghanistan when U.S. Pentagon Spokesman Geoff Morrell said 
to reporters, "Any country that finds it difficult to give military 
support is asked to give financial aid."  This remark signals that 
the U.S. is seeking to secure further financial assistance from the 
ROK, judging that it would be difficult for the ROK to send troops. 
 
 
 
SEOUL 00001670  007 OF 007 
 
 
The top U.S. military commander in Afghanistan is demanding that 
additional troops be deployed.  However, President Obama has not 
made a decision on the issue.  With a Vietnam War-like nightmare 
looming, an increasing number of Americans are calling for the 
withdrawal of troops.  It seems that the Obama Administration has 
not devised its Afghan strategy clearly.  Therefore, in this 
situation, it would be difficult for the U.S. to request its allies 
to send troops. 
 
Troop deployment to Afghanistan is a "hot potato" issue.  But we 
should fulfill our commitment as an ally and a responsible member of 
the international community in order to shoulder the burden.  It 
would have been difficult for the U.S. to ask for a military 
contribution.  However, the U.S.'s request for a financial 
contribution seems to assuage any burden for the ROKG. 
 
The ROKG needs to expand financial aid to Afghanistan in line with 
its international status even if it holds off considering troop 
deployment for now. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>