^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1644  |  2009-10-19  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 19일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001644

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://m.mediatoday.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=83597|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 19일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/15 15:19//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 한겨레 신문, 세계일보, 모든 텔레비전
＂국가 백년대계 타협해선 안돼＂ 李대통령, 세종市 관련 첫 언급

중앙일보
"MB 평양 방문/ 김정일이 요청"

동아일보
수능성적 상승 1위 수지高-곡성郡

한국일보, 서울신문
美국방부 "김정일, MB 평양 초청"/ 정부 "오해로 빚어진 해프닝" 일축

===== 국내 동향 =====

김정일 북한 국방위원장이 이명박 대통령의 평양 방문을 초청했다고 미국 국방부의 고위 당국자가 밝혔다. 청와대는 “지난 10일 한·중 정상회담에서 정보공유 차원에서 미 행정부 쪽에 (그 내용을) 전달했는데 미국 내부 커뮤니케이션 과정에서 오해가 있었다”고 반박했다. ([[http://news.khan.co.kr/kh_news/khan_art_view.html?artid=200910190559365&code=94|전체]])

미 고위급 당국자는 미국에서 한국으로 전시 작전통제권을 이양하는 “결정은 2012년의 상황을 놓고 종합적으로 판단할 것"이라고 말했다. 이번 발언은 전작권 이양 시기의 조정 가능성을 염두에 두었을 수도 있다. (중앙, 동아, 한겨레, 세계, 서울, MBC)

한국 정부 고위급 당국자는 18일 이산가족 상봉 개최에 대한 대가로 북한에 대규모 쌀 원조를 제공하지는 않겠다고 말했다. 북한은 지난 16일 남북 적십자 실무 접촉 중에 인도적 원조를 요청했었다. (중앙, 동아, 서울, KBS)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

미 국무부가 리근 북한 미국 국장에게 비자를 발급하기로 했면서 이달 말 북미 양국 사이 대면 접촉 전망을 높였다. (전체)

일본 요미우리 신문은 미국이 북미 양자 대화 개최지로 중국 베이징 등 제3국을 희망하고 있다는 점을 전달했다고 보도했다. (중앙, 세계)

이달 초 북한을 방문한 원자바오 중국 총리가 6자회담 복귀에 미온적 태도를 보인 북측에 경제개발 지원을 보류했다고 아사히신문이 북한과 중국의 소식통을 인용해 (17일) 보도했다. (동아, [[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01100401.20091019100006030|한국]])

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

모든 한국 언론은 오늘 리근 북한 미국 국장에게 비자를 발급하기로 했다는 소식에 관심을 보였다. 대다수 언론은 이를 두고 미국이 북미 간 대면 접촉 전망이 높아졌다고 보았다. 중도 우파 중앙일보는 <[[http://news.joins.com/article/3830728|뉴욕 가는 이근 … 무르익는 북·미 대화]]>란 제하의 기사를 작성하였다.

김정일 북한 국방위원장이 이명박 대통령의 평양 방문을 초청했다고 18일 미국 국방부의 고위 당국자가 밝혔다는 소식과 청와대가 부인했다는 소식이 언론에 크게 보도되었다. 청와대 핵심 당국자의 발언: "이 대통령과 원자바오 중국 총리가 지난 10일 한·중 정상회담에서 ‘남북관계의 진전이 이뤄지면 남북정상회담도 가능하지 않겠느냐’는 대화를 나눴다. 정보공유 차원에서 미 행정부 쪽에 (그 내용을) 전달했는데 미국 내부 커뮤니케이션 과정에서 오해가 있었다"

신문은 다음과 같은 제목의 기사를 실었다: <청와대 ＂남북정상회담 실제 추진되는 상황 아니다＂;＂원론적인 얘기＂… 美브리핑 확대해석 경계 > (보수 조선일보); <[뉴스분석]천기누설? 불협화음?> (보수 동아일보); <정부 "김정일 MB초청설 오해다" 해명 왜?((역주: 대사관식 제목: 미국의 일방적인 브리핑, 외교 관례에 반한다))> 중도 한국일보) <청와대 “美측의 실수” 불쾌> (보수 세계일보)

보수 조선일보 사설: "결국 현 시점에서 남북정상회담은 북한 핵 문제는 회담 주제에 올리지도 못한 채 '우리 민족끼리'라는 정치적 수사학(修辭學)을 앞세운 북한에 경제지원이나 약속하는 선심 잔치밖에 될 수가 없다. 그렇다면 이번처럼 진지하지도 않게 그저 지나가는 식의 북한측 남북정상회담 제의에 한·미가 허둥댈 일이 아니다. 오히려 당당하게 북한의 제안을 공개하고 이에 대한 우리측의 분명한 원칙과 입장을 천명해 오해가 없도록 하는 게 정도(正道)다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/18/2009101800798.html|[사설] 北核 의제에도 못 올릴 정상회담이라면 생각도 말라]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 19일, 35면)

미국 국방부 고위관계자가 지난 14일 브리핑에서 "우리는 지금 갑작스럽게 북한이 (입장을 바꿔) 우호적으로 나오는 단계에 도달했다"며 "김정일 국방위원장이 이명박 대통령에게 평양을 방문해달라고 초청했고, 원자바오 중국 총리가 북한을 방문했다"고 말했다. 오는 22일 서울에서 열리는 한·미 연례안보협의회(SCM)에 참석하는 로버트 게이츠 미 국방장관의 일정을 설명하는 자리에서 나온 말이다.

청와대 관계자는 이에 대해 "이달 초 베이징에서 열린 이 대통령과 원자바오 중국 총리의 한·중(韓·中) 정상회담과, 지난 8월 23일 김기남 북한 노동당 비서가 청와대에서 이 대통령을 만났을 때 '남북관계가 진전되면 남북정상회담도 할 수 있다'는 원론적 차원의 언급이 있었을 뿐 실제 남북정상회담을 추진하고 있지는 않다"고 말했다. 북한 김정일 위원장이 원자바오 총리와 김기남 비서를 통해 두 차례 남북정상회담 가능성을 타진한 것은 맞다는 이야기다.

이 관계자는 "우리가 정보 공유 차원에서 미측에 (북의 남북정상회담 제안을) 전달했는데 미국 내부 커뮤니케이션 과정에서 오해가 있었던 것 같다"며, 남북정상회담을 공개적으로 거론한 미국측에 강한 불만을 표시했다. 청와대는 지난 8월 이 대통령과 김기남 비서의 면담에서 남북정상회담 언급이 있었다는 언론 보도가 나오자, 외교안보수석실 명의의 해명 자료를 내 "남북정상회담 관련 사항은 일절 거론된 바 없다"고 부인했었다. (그것을 미국 국방부 관계자가 이번 브리핑에서 공개해 버린 셈이다.)

과거 동·서독 정상들은 수시로 만나 양자 간에 걸린 각종 현안을 놓고 직접 담판을 벌였다. 그러나 남북 정상은 지난 2000년과 2007년에 열린 두 차례 정상회담에서 최대 현안인 북핵 문제를 피해갔다. 남북정상회담을 역사에 남을 치적(治績)으로 여기고 오로지 회담의 성사만을 위해 북한이 원치 않는 주제는 꺼내지조차 않았던 것이다.

그러나 현 상황에서 북한 핵을 우회(迂廻)해 남북관계 진전을 꾀할 방법은 없다. 지금 북한의 핵은 남북 교류 확대나 상호 협력을 막고 있는 최대 장애물이다. 그런데 북한은 지금껏 자신들에 대한 정치·안보적 보장과 대북 지원 등 자기들이 원하는 모든 것을 손에 쥔 후에야 핵 폐기가 가능하다는 입장을 한 번도 굽힌 적이 없다. 북핵 문제는 한국이 아니라 미국과 해결할 사안이라는 주장도 처음과 그대로다. 결국 현 시점에서 남북정상회담은 북한 핵 문제는 회담 주제에 올리지도 못한 채 '우리 민족끼리'라는 정치적 수사학(修辭學)을 앞세운 북한에 경제지원이나 약속하는 선심 잔치밖에 될 수가 없다. 그렇다면 이번처럼 진지하지도 않게 그저 지나가는 식의 북한측 남북정상회담 제의에 한·미가 허둥댈 일이 아니다. 오히려 당당하게 북한의 제안을 공개하고 이에 대한 우리측의 분명한 원칙과 입장을 천명해 오해가 없도록 하는 게 정도(正道)다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/politics/defense/382559.html|“김정일, 이대통령 초청” 미국은 흘리고 한국은 주워담고]]**(한겨레신문, 2009년 10월 19일, 3면)

강태호 남북관계전문기자, 워싱턴/권태호 특파원, 황준범 기자

미국쪽 “북, 유화국면”…청와대쪽 “미국오해” 북-미 관계 획기적 변화에 한-미 ‘미묘한 기류’

미국 국방부 당국자가 14일(현지시각) 북한이 이명박 대통령을 남북정상회담에 초청했다고 밝힌 데 대해 청와대가 부인하고 이의를 제기하는 등 논란이 빚어졌다.

이 당국자는 기자들을 만난 자리에서 “북한이 계속 유화적인 자세를 취하고 있다”며 ‘북한의 다음 수순이 무엇일 것 같으냐’는 물음에 “북한이 이명박 정부가 들어선 뒤로는 미사일을 쏘는 등 긴장 국면을 연출했지만, 최근에는 다자회담 참석 의사도 밝히고, 원자바오 중국 총리도 초청하고, 이명박 대통령도 초청하는 등 유화 국면에 들어섰다”고 답변했다.이에 대해 청와대의 핵심 당국자는 18일 기자들과 만나 “남북정상회담 얘기는 미국 쪽의 오해”라며 “(북이 남북정상회담을 제안한 것으로 잘못 알고) 놀라지 말 것”을 당부했다. 청와대의 고위 관계자도 이날 <한겨레>와 한 통화에서 정상회담과 관련해 “경협이나 잔뜩 하는 것은 생각하지 않는다”며 “핵문제가 반드시 해결돼야 하고 인도적 문제들도 풀려야 한다”고 말했다.

그러나 ‘아니 땐 굴뚝에 연기 나랴’라는 말이 있듯이 미 국방부 당국자의 단순한 말실수로 보기 어려운 흐름이 있다. 남북간의 물밑 비공개 접촉 여부를 제외하면 김정일 위원장이 이 대통령에게 공식적으로 메시지를 보낸 건 두번이다. 하나는 지난 8월 중순 김대중 전 대통령 서거 때 북쪽 특사 조의방문단의 이 대통령 면담이고, 다른 하나는 지난 10일 베이징 한-중-일 정상회담에서 원자바오 총리가 전한 남북관계 개선에 대한 김 위원장의 언급이다. 김기남 당비서 등 북의 특사 조의방문단이 이 대통령을 만나는 과정에서 남북관계 개선을 위한 두 정상 간의 대화 필요성 내지 의지의 표명이었던 것으로 알려지고 있다.

중요한 건 청와대나 이 대통령의 말에 변화가 있다는 것이다. 우선 원 총리와 한 회담에서 이 대통령은 “북한이 진정으로 핵을 포기한다면 우리는 얼마든지 열린 자세로 대화할 용의가 있다”고 말했다. 이 대통령은 또한 한-중-일 정상회담 뒤 기자회견에선 “기회가 닿으면 언제든지 북한에 대해서도 그러한 방침(그랜드 바겐)을 설명드리고 협력을 구하고자 한다”고 말했다. 그리고 지난 15일 주한 외교관들을 초청한 청와대 다과회에서는 “북한도 이제는 핵을 포기할 때가 됐고 (지금이) 좋은 기회라는 점에서 긍정적으로 생각해 줄 것을 기대하고 있다”고 말했다. (핵 포기를 전제로 또는 핵 포기를 위한 남북정상회담 의사로 볼 수 있다.)

그랜드 바겐에 대한 북한의 반응도 전면 거부는 아니다. 9월30일 북한 관영 <중앙통신>은 이를 ‘핵문제 해결에 백해무익한 제안’이라고 하면서도 이 대통령을 겨냥한 비난은 피했을 뿐만 아니라 “미국의 반공화국 적대시 정책 철회 없이 우리의 핵 포기에 대해 운운하는 것은 허황한 꿈”이라고만 말했다.

그랜드 바겐도 그렇고 이번 발언은 그 이면에 북-미 관계의 획기적 변화와 남북정상회담 가능성을 놓고 한-미 간에 우려·의심·전망 등 미묘한 기류가 흐르고 있음을 보여준다.

(이 기사는 한겨레 신문이 준비한 번역이다. 우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 일부 수정을 가했다.)

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1644.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001644 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 19, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun, Segye Ilbo, All TVs 
"We Should Not Compromise on Policy for Nation's Future;" President 
Lee Mentions Controversial Sejong City Project 
for First Time 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Senior U.S. Pentagon Official: "N. Korean Leader Kim Jong-il Has 
Invited President Lee to Visit Pyongyang" 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Suji, Gokseong High Schools Show Largest Gains in College Entrance 
Test Scores from 2005 to 2009 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
Seoul Denies Summit Proposal from N. Korea 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
A senior U.S. Pentagon official said yesterday that North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il has invited President Lee Myung-bak to visit 
Pyongyang. The Blue House, however, denied the claim, saying: "We 
recently informed the USG about the Oct. 10 ROK-China summit. There 
seems to have been a misunderstanding in Washington about what we 
told them."(All) 
 
The senior U.S. official also said that a decision on the transfer 
of wartime operational control from the U.S. to the ROK will be made 
based on how things look in 2012. This remark may suggest a possible 
adjustment to the timing of the OPCON transfer. (JoongAng, Dong-a, 
Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul, MBC) 
 
A senior ROKG official said yesterday that Seoul will not provide 
massive rice aid to North Korea in exchange for holding separated 
family reunions. The North asked for humanitarian aid during last 
Friday's Red Cross talks on cross-border family reunions. (JoongAng, 
Dong-a, Seoul, KBS) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
The State Department has decided to grant a visa to Ri Gun, Director 
General of American Affairs at North Korea's Foreign Ministry, 
raising the prospect of a one-on-one contact between the two 
countries later this month. (All) 
 
According to Japan's Yomiuri Shimbun, the U.S. has suggested to 
North Korea holding bilateral talks in a third country such as China 
in mid-November. (JoongAng, Segye) 
 
According to Japan's Asahi Shimbun, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao has 
put off economic aid to North Korea due to the North's lackadaisical 
attitude toward returning to the Six-Party Talks. (Dong-a, Hankook) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
All ROK media today gave attention to the State Department's 
decision to grant a visa to Ri Gun, Director General of American 
Affairs at North Korea's Foreign Ministry.  Most media viewed this 
U.S. move as raising the prospect of a one-on-one contact between 
the two countries later this month.  Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo 
wrote in the headline: "Ri Gun Goes to New York... U.S.- N. Korea 
Dialogue Ripening." 
 
SEOUL 00001644  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
A senior U.S. Pentagon official's Oct. 18 claim - that North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il has invited President Lee Myung-bak to visit 
Pyongyang - and the Blue House's denial received wide press 
coverage.  A key Blue House official was quoted: "We recently 
informed the USG about the Oct. 10 ROK-China summit.  There seems to 
have been a misunderstanding in Washington about what we told them. 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao did not specifically say that Kim 
extended an invitation to President Lee." 
 
Newspapers carried the following headlines: "Blue House Wary of U.S. 
Over-interpretation, Saying: 'No Inter-Korean Summit Is Being 
Pursued'" (conservative Chosun Ilbo); "Did N. Korean Leader Invite 
President Lee to Pyongyang?... U.S. Claim Creates a Stir with Seoul" 
(conservative Dong-a Ilbo); "Unilateral U.S. Briefing Goes against 
Diplomatic Protocol" (moderate Hankook Ilbo); and "Blue House 
Displeased with U.S. Mistake" (conservative Segye Ilbo) 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "Should an inter-Korean 
summit take place at this point, it would inevitably be reduced to a 
venue for economic aid to North Korea, instead of dealing with the 
North Korean nuclear issue.   There is no reason for the ROK and the 
U.S. to rush around, faced with the North's insincere proposal for 
an inter-Korean summit.  Instead, it is appropriate for the ROKG to 
disclose the North's proposal in a direct manner and to make clear 
its principles and positions in order not to cause any unnecessary 
misunderstandings." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
 DID N. KOREA PROPOSE A SUMMIT? 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 19, 2009, page 35) 
 
A high-ranking U.S. Defense Department official told reporters last 
Wednesday that North Korea is unexpectedly taking a conciliatory 
stance, with North Korean leader Kim Jong-il inviting ROK President 
Lee Myung-bak to visit.  The comments came during a briefing 
explaining the itinerary of Defense Secretary Robert Gates during 
his visit to Seoul on Thursday for the annual Security Consultative 
Meeting (SCM). 
 
A Cheong Wa Dae official said that no such summit is being planned, 
although there were discussions in principle about the possibility 
of a summit if inter-Korean relations improve.  These discussions 
took place earlier this month during the summit between Lee and 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and also when North Korean Worker's Party 
Secretary Kim Ki-nam met with Lee in Cheong Wa Dae on Aug. 23.  So 
it is true at least that the North Korean leader sounded out the 
possibility of a summit with Lee on two occasions. 
 
The Cheong Wa Dae official said the U.S. government appears to have 
misunderstood what Seoul said in a briefing to U.S. officials.  When 
ROK media reported on the discussion of a summit during Lee's 
meeting with the North Korean envoy in August, the presidential 
secretary for national security issued a statement saying there was 
"absolutely no discussion of a summit." 
 
The leaders of East and West Germany met frequently to discuss 
various matters, but during their two summits in 2000 and 2007, the 
leaders of North and South Korea avoided any discussion of the 
nuclear issue, which is the most important item on the agenda 
involving the two countries.  The desire to leave a historic 
achievement was uppermost in the ROK presidents' minds, causing any 
topics that could upset North Korea to be swept off the agenda 
altogether. 
 
In the present situation, there is no way to hold an inter-Korean 
summit without addressing the North's nuclear arms program.  It is 
the greatest obstacle blocking increased inter-Korean exchanges and 
cooperation.  But the North has always insisted that nuclear 
dismantlement would be possible only after it receives security 
guarantees and economic aid, and it still insists that the nuclear 
 
SEOUL 00001644  003 OF 004 
 
 
issue is something to be discussed with the U.S. rather than the 
ROK.  Should an inter-Korean summit take place at this point, it 
would inevitably be reduced to a venue for economic aid to North 
Korea, instead of dealing with the North Korean nuclear issue. 
There is no reason for the ROK and the U.S. to rush around, faced 
with the North's insincere proposal for an inter-Korean summit. 
Instead, it is appropriate for the ROKG to disclose the North's 
proposal in a direct manner and to make clear its principles and 
positions in order not to cause any unnecessary misunderstandings. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
CONTROVERSY ERUPTS OVER U.S. PENTAGON OFFICIAL'S STATEMENT THAT N. 
KOREA PROPOSED AN INTER-KOREAN SUMMIT 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, October 19, 2009, page 3) 
 
By Reporters Kang Tae-ho and Hwang Joon-beom, Washington 
correspondent Kwon Tae-ho 
 
While S. Korea rushes to deny the content of the remark, some 
analysts say subtle changes in discourse on N. Korea issues indicate 
preparation for epochal changes on the Korean peninsula are taking 
place 
 
A U.S. Pentagon official's statement Thursday (local time) that 
North Korea has invited President Lee Myung-bak for an inter-Korean 
summit has resulted in controversy, and has the Cheong Wa Dae (the 
presidential office in the ROK or Blue House) issuing statements of 
denial and expressing skepticism over the interpretation of 
exchanges with North Korea. 
 
In a meeting with reporters, the U.S. official said North Korea was 
continuing to adopt a conciliatory posture.  When asked what North 
Korea would do next, he said that since the beginning of the Lee 
Myung-bak Administration, North Korea has escalated tensions by 
shooting missiles etc., but, recently, it has entered a conciliatory 
phase, expressed its intention to participate in multi-party talks 
and invited Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao and President Lee to 
North Korea.  In response, a key Cheong Wa Dae official met with 
reporters Sunday and denied the U.S. official's claims and said a 
reference to North Korea's request for an inter-Korean summit was a 
misunderstanding.  He also pleaded with reporters, who might 
mistakenly believe North Korea had proposed a summit, not to be 
surprised at the news.  Another Cheong Wa Dae official said that the 
ROKG does not consider only discussing massive economic aid to North 
Korea in the inter-Korean summit, adding that the North Korean 
nuclear issue and humanitarian issue should also be addressed. 
 
However, some observers say where there is smoke, there is fire, and 
when seen in light of the situation on the Korean peninsula, it is 
hard to believe that the U.S. Pentagon official's statement was 
merely a slip of the tongue.  With the exception of unofficial 
inter-Korean contacts, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il has 
officially sent President Lee messages on two occasions.  One was in 
mid-August when former a North Korea mourning delegation traveled to 
the ROK to pay condolences to the late President Kim Dae-jung and 
met with President Lee.  While meeting with Lee, the North Korea 
mourning delegation, including Workers Party of Korea Secretary Kim 
Ki-nam, reportedly expressed the need for even a dialogue between 
the leaders of the two Koreas in order to improve inter-Korean ties. 
 The other occurred on Oct. 10 during the second trilateral leaders' 
meeting of China, Japan, and the ROK in Beijing, during which 
Chinese Prime Minister Wen conveyed Kim's statement regarding his 
intention to improve inter-Korean relations. 
 
Most of all, analysts are saying the focus should be on slight 
changes in the language used by the Cheong Wa Dae and President Lee. 
 First, in his meeting with Prime Minister Wen, Lee said if North 
Korea truly abandons its nuclear program, Seoul is prepared to have 
 
SEOUL 00001644  004 OF 004 
 
 
an open dialogue with North Korea.  In a press conference following 
the Korea-China-Japan summit, Lee also said if the opportunity 
arises, he intends to explain his proposed "Grand Bargain" to North 
Korea and earn their cooperation.  On Thursday, during a coffee 
meeting with foreign diplomats in Seoul, Lee said he expects that it 
is time for North Korea to abandon its nuclear program and 
proactively consider the bargain. 
 
Analysts are also pointing out that North Korea's response to the 
Grand Bargain has not been one of complete rejection.  On Sept. 30, 
although North Korea's official Korea Central News Agency (KCNA) 
called the "Grand Bargain" a harmful and "not good" proposal for 
resolving the nuclear issue, it avoided criticism of President Lee 
and it merely said it was absurd to demand that North Korea abandon 
its nuclear program without the U.S. first withdrawing its hostile 
anti-North Korea policies. 
 
When all of the exchanges are placed together, subtle changes can be 
discerned in the tone of relevant parties' remarks regarding Korean 
Peninsula issues, including the "Grand Bargain."  This is leading 
some to conclude that preparations are underway for the possibility 
of an inter-Korean summit and epochal changes in North Korea-U.S. 
relations. 
 
(This is a translation prepared by the newspaper.  We have compared 
the English version on the website with the Korean version and made 
some changes to make them identical.) 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>