^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1711  |  2009-10-28  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 28일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001711

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=83768&page=58&total=2313|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 28일]]
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/25 06:35//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
신종플루 치사율, 독감보다 낮지만… ＂방심 안돼

중앙일보
신종플루, 한 달이 고비다

동아일보, 모든 텔레비전.
또…철책 뚫렸다

한국일보
학원가, 신종플루 '사각지대'

한겨레 신문
질병 없던 20대여성 신종플루 사망

세계일보
또 4명 사망…신종플루 불안 고조

서울신문
30일부터 약국 항바이러스제 조제

===== 국내 동향 =====

남한 민간인 한 사람이 중무장 된 남북 국경을 뚫고 월북했다고 북한의 조선중앙통신이 전했다. 한국 합동참모는 27일 "철책이 절단된 흔적"을 발견했다고 밝혔다. 한국군은 월북 이후 하루 동안 "깜깜" 무소식이었다는 비판을 받고 있다. (전체)

우리나라 수입 검역에서 불합격 판정을 받은 미국산 쇠고기에 대한 정보를 공개해야 한다는 법원의 판결이 나왔다. (조선, 한국, 한겨레)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

미 국무부의 마이클 포스너(Posner) 민주·인권·노동 담당 차관보는 26일 북한의 인권문제가 북핵 6자회담에서 다뤄질 필요가 있다고 말했다. (조선)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 종교 자유 보고서/북한 ====

보수 조선일보는 마이클 포스너(Posner) 민주·인권·노동 담당 차관보의 26일 기자회견 발언을 1면에 실었다. 기자회견에서 마이클 포스너는 북한 인권이 6자회담 의제가 되어야 한다고 밝혔다. 조선은 포스너 차관보의 이날 언급은 버락 오바마(Obama) 행정부 내에서 북한과의 대화에서 북한 인권 문제를 다뤄야 한다는 주장이 커지고 있음을 반영한다고 말했다.

==== 아프간 원조 ====

좌파 성향 한겨레 신문 사설: "아프간전은 이제 테러와의 전쟁이라기보다 내전이라고 해야 할 정도로 성격이 변했다. …전쟁으로 피폐한 아프간의 재건과 부흥을 위해 우리의 국제적 위상과 경제력에 걸맞은 기여를 하는 것은 당연하다. 그렇지만 아프간 국민과 적대 관계를 만들고, 우리 국민이 테러의 대상이 될 수밖에 없는 파병만큼은 결코 해선 안 된다.

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/opinion/editorial/384343.html|[사설]미국의 눈짓 한번에 파병 카드 꺼낸 정부]]**(한겨레신문, 2009년 10월 28일, 31면)

이명박 정부가 아프간에 다시 파병할 움직임을 보이고 있다. 유명환 외교통상부 장관이 그제 국회 외교통상통일위원회에서 아프간 재건을 위해 민간 전문요원 130명 정도를 파견해 운용할 방침이라면서, 이들을 보호할 경찰이나 병력을 파견하는 문제를 검토하고 있다고 밝혔다. 정부 당국자로선 처음으로 군인 파병의 뜻을 내비친 것이다. 이를 받아 청와대 관계자가 어제 특전사가 아닌 일반 병력 가운데 지원을 받아 300명 정도를 보낼 것이라면서 파병을 기정사실화했다. 이미 윤곽이 결정된 단계라며 발표가 임박했음도 예고했다.

정부가 아프간에서 완전 철군한 지 2년 가까이 지난 시점에서, 다시 파병하려면 이를 뒷받침하는 특별한 이유를 제시해야 한다. 하지만 미국의 우회적인 파병 요청 외엔 그런 것이 보이지 않는다. 유 장관은 국회에서 “글로벌 코리아로 가기 위해 테러와의 전쟁에 참여하는 것이 하나의 의무이며, 아프간 정세의 안정은 안정적인 주한미군 주둔 여건을 조성하는 문제와도 직간접으로 연결되어 있다”는 논리를 제시했다. 그러나 논거도 맞지 않고, 새로운 얘기도 아니다. 아프간전은 이제 테러와의 전쟁이라기보다 내전이라고 해야 할 정도로 성격이 변했다. 한국 주둔 미군의 국외 배치 문제도 2006년 1월 한-미 전략대화에서 주한미군의 전략적 유연성에 합의할 때 이미 예고된 것이다.

오히려 이상한 것은 마이클 멀린 미군 합참의장이 일부 주한미군 병력을 이라크나 아프간으로 이동배치할 수 있다는 발언을 하자마자, 유 장관이 마치 기다렸다는 듯이 주한미군의 안정적 주둔 여건을 거론한 점이다. 둘이 입을 맞춰, 아프간에 파병을 하지 않으면 주한미군을 빼갈 테니 잠자코 파병해야 한다고 협박하는 것처럼 들린다.

거듭 말하지만, 전쟁으로 피폐한 아프간의 재건과 부흥을 위해 우리의 국제적 위상과 경제력에 걸맞은 기여를 하는 것은 당연하다. 그렇지만 아프간 국민과 적대 관계를 만들고, 우리 국민이 테러의 대상이 될 수밖에 없는 파병만큼은 결코 해선 안 된다. 2007년 여름 선교단체의 집단인질 사건 이후 의료·건설 부대를 전원 철수한 교훈을 되새겨야 한다. 더욱이 지금 아프간은 전 지역이 전쟁터라고 할 만큼 위험하다. 설사 민간인을 파견한다 해도, 계획은 세워 놓되 정국이 안정될 때까지 기다리는 것이 옳다.

**[[http://news.donga.com/List/3/70/20091028/23726722/2|[사설]美국방관계자, 주한미군 문제 함부로 발언 말라]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 28일, 39면)

주한미군 병력 일부를 이라크나 아프가니스탄으로 이동 배치하는 방안을 검토 중이라고 말했던 마이클 멀린 미국 합참의장이 우리 국방부에 공식 해명을 했다. 그는 “주한미군 전력은 그대로 유지될 것”이라며 “주한미군의 이동배치 발언은 용산 기지에서 미군 장병들의 질문에 답하는 과정에서 나온 것으로 공식 답변이 아니었다”고 밝혔다. 이로써 발언의 파장은 가라앉았지만 개운치 않은 여운을 남겼다.

멀린 합참의장의 당초 언급은 지난주 한미 연례안보협의회(SCM) 때 채택한 공동성명은 물론 미국 정부 방침에도 정면 배치된다. 로버트 게이츠 국방장관은 이번에 2만8500명의 현 주한미군 병력의 유지를 재확인하면서 “유사시 세계 전역의 가용(可用) 미군 병력과 능력을 한국에 증강 배치하겠다”고 확약했다. 또 “한국이 완전한 자주방위 역량을 갖출 때까지 미국이 보완전력을 계속 제공한다”고 약속했다. 그런데 바로 같은 날 멀린 합참의장은 주한미군의 이전배치 가능성을 시사했다.

미 국방장관과 합참의장의 개인적 견해차에 불과할 수 있지만 한국의 아프간 전투병 파견을 유도하기 위해 역할 분담을 한 것일 수도 있다. 주한미군을 전 세계적인 ‘전략적 유연성’의 대상으로 삼는 내부 방침을 세운 것인지도 모른다.

발언의 배경이 무엇이든 주한미군의 존재와 병력 규모는 우리의 안보와 직결돼 있다. 우리가 매년 막대한 미군 주둔비용을 부담하고 용산 기지의 평택 이전 사업에 심혈을 기울이며 미군 파병 지역에 대한 지원 문제에 고심해 온 것은 이 때문이다.

주한미군 병력에 관해서는 작년 4월 이명박-조지 W 부시 정상회담에서 작년 말까지로 예정됐던 3500명 추가 감축 계획을 동결해 2만8500명 선을 유지하기로 합의했다. 이는 두 달 후인 6월 이상희-게이츠 국방장관 회담과 12월 월터 샤프 주한미군사령관의 발언에서도 재확인됐다. 게이츠 장관은 “주한미군의 변화와 관련된 사안은 한국 정부와 충분한 협의 및 논의 없이 결정되지 않을 것”이라고 언명했다. 버락 오바마 대통령도 올해 6월 한미 정상회담에서 이 방침을 승계할 뜻을 분명히 했다.

멀린 합참의장의 말은 사려 깊지 못했다. 미 국방 관계자들이 비슷한 발언으로 우리의 안보 불안감을 높인 사례가 과거에도 종종 있었다. 다른 현안을 해결하기 위해 주한미군 문제에 대해 함부로 말해선 안 된다. 한국에 요구할 것이 있으면 공식석상에서 터놓고 협의하는 것이 동맹의 정신에 맞다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/society/society_general/384368.html|고법 “검역 불합격 미 쇠고기 정보 공개하라”]]**(한겨레 신문, 2009년 10월 28일, 12면)

김기태 노현웅 기자

우리나라 수입 검역에서 불합격 판정을 받은 미국산 쇠고기에 대한 세부정보를 공개해야 한다는 법원의 판결이 나왔다.

서울고법 행정4부(윤재윤 부장판사)는 27일 민주사회를 위한 변호사 모임(민변)이 국립수의과학검역원장을 상대로 낸 정보비공개처분 취소 청구소송 항소심에서 원심과 같이 원고 승소 판결을 내렸다. 재판부는 “해당 작업장들이 수입 관련 기준을 잘 준수하고 있는지 공개함으로써 광우병에 대한 불안감을 불식시키고 미국산 쇠고기 검역이 더욱 투명하게 집행될 수 있는 계기를 제공할 것으로 기대한다”고 밝혔다. 앞선 1심에서도 재판부는 “수입 축산물이 검역 기준을 지켰는지는 국민의 건강·생명에 직결된 중요한 문제”라며 원고 승소 판결을 내린 바 있다.

민변은 지난해 6월 ‘미국산 쇠고기 및 쇠고기 제품의 수입위생조건’이 고시되자 농림수산식품부 장관에게 쇠고기 원산지 표시를 위반한 업소명과 주소, 위반 건수, 물량, 불합격 사유 등 정보를 공개하라고 요구했다. 그러나 해당 정보를 관리하는 검역원은 불합격 건수와 수량 등은 공개하면서도, ‘해당 정보가 모두 공개될 경우 미국산 쇠고기가 국민 건강을 위협할 수 있는 심각한 잘못을 저지른 것으로 오해받을 수 있다’며 작업장별 불합격 사유는 공개하지 않았다.

민변 소속의 송기호 변호사는 “정부의 고시에 의하면 미국 작업장이 검역 기준을 위반할 경우 수출 중단을 포함한 조치를 우리 정부가 취할 수 있도록 되어 있다”며 “검역 기준을 위반한 미국 작업장의 정보가 공개되면 정부가 미국 작업장에 대한 검역 조치를 고시한 대로 취하는지 국민들이 점검할 수 있게 된다는 점에서 이번 판결은 의미가 있다”고 밝혔다.

이에 대해 이주호 수의과학검역원장은 “정보 공개 여부는 검역원에서 법무부와 농식품부와 함께 협의해서 결정한 것”이라며 “고법의 판결에 대해 대법원에 상고를 할지, 아니면 정보를 공개할지 여부도 관련 기관과 함께 검토를 한 뒤 결정하겠다”고 말했다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1711.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 28, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
New Flu Death Rate Is Lower Than That of Seasonal Flu... But People 
Should Stay Alert 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Next One Month Is Crucial for New Flu 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, All TVs 
ROK Man Defects to N. Korea 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Private Cram Schools "Blind Spot" in New Flu Prevention; They Take 
No Precautions against the Disease 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Young Woman in her 20s with No Underlying Illness Dies of New Flu 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Another Four Deaths from New Flu...Anxiety Runs High over Growing 
Flu Epidemic 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
Antiviral Drugs Available at Drug Stores Beginning Oct. 30 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------- 
 
According to North Korea's official Korean Central News Agency, an 
ROK man defected to the North on Oct. 26 through the heavily armed 
inter-Korean border. The ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff said yesterday 
that it found "barbed wire cut open" at the border. The ROK military 
is under criticism for having been "in the dark" for more than a day 
after his defection. (All) 
 
The Seoul High Court ruled yesterday that information on U.S. beef 
imports should be disclosed if the imports fail to pass quarantine 
inspection. (Chosun, Hankook, Hankyoreh) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Michael Posner, Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human 
Rights, and Labor, said during an Oct. 26 press conference in 
Washington that North Korea's human rights should also be on the 
agenda for the Six-Party Talks. (Chosun) 
 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
- Religious Freedom Report/N. Korea 
----------------------------------- 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo gave front-page play to Oct. 26 press 
remarks by Michael Posner, Assistant Secretary of State for 
Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, in which he said that North 
Korea's human rights should also be on the agenda for the Six-Party 
Talks.  Chosun observed that this remark by Assistant Secretary 
Posner reflects increasing calls in the Obama Administration that 
the North Korean human rights issue should be dealt with in dialogue 
with North Korea. 
 
- Aid for Afghanistan 
--------------------- 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun editorialized: "The nature of the 
Afghan war has changed so much that it should now be called a civil 
war, rather than the war against terrorism.  ... It is natural for 
 
SEOUL 00001711  002 OF 004 
 
 
us to make contributions to the reconstruction of the war-torn 
country in line with our global status and economic power.  However, 
we should in no way send troops to the country, because such a move 
would make the Afghan people hostile toward us and our people will 
be targets of terrorism." 
 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
Government Must not Redeploy Troops to Afghanistan 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, October 28, 2009, Page 31) 
 
The Lee Myung-bak Administration is showing signs that it will 
resend troops to Afghanistan.  At a National Assembly Committee on 
Unification, Foreign Affairs and Trade meeting two days ago, Foreign 
Minister Yu Myung-hwan said the government plans to send about 130 
civilian specialists to help rebuild Afghanistan, and is considering 
whether to send police or troops to ensure their safety.  This is 
the first time a government official has officially suggested that 
the government would send troops.  A Blue House official yesterday 
established the government's intention to dispatch troops, saying 
they would send 300 volunteers from the regular army, not the 
Special Forces.  He also hinted a decision is imminent, saying the 
outline for the complete plan has been decided upon. 
 
Nearly two years after completely withdrawing, the government must 
present a special reason to resend combat troops to Afghanistan. 
There does not appear to be any clear rationale, aside from an 
indirect request from the U.S.  Yu said participating in the fight 
against terrorism is a duty for the nation to become a "global 
Korea," and stabilizing the political situation in Afghanistan is 
directly connected to the issue of creating stable stationing 
conditions for the United States Forces Korea (USFK), although this 
is not a new rationale.  The ROK had been contributing to the war on 
terror long before the "global Korea" mantra, and it still continues 
to do so.  The nature of the Afghan war has changed so much that it 
should now be called a civil war, rather than the war against 
terrorism.  The issue of the overseas deployment of U.S. troops 
stationed in the ROK was the result of an agreement on USFK 
strategic flexibility during ROK-U.S. strategic talks in Jan. 2006. 
 
The strange thing is that as soon as Admiral Michael Mullen, 
Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, mentioned the U.S. could 
redeploy troops from the ROK to Iraq and Afghanistan, Yu 
simultaneously brought up conditions for a stable USFK deployment. 
Those comments give the appearance that the U.S. applied pressure to 
the ROK, as both stated that the USFK could be taken away if the ROK 
does not send troops to Afghanistan. 
 
It is natural for us to make contributions to the reconstruction of 
this war-torn country in line with our global status and economic 
power.  However, we should in no way send troops to the country, 
because such a move would make the Afghan people hostile toward us 
and our people will be targets of terrorism.  We must reexamine the 
lesson learned when we completely withdrew our medical and 
engineering units following the mass kidnapping of a missionary 
group in the summer of 2007.  Moreover, Afghanistan is now so 
dangerous that the entire country could be considered a war zone. 
Even if the government plans to send civilians, it is best to wait 
until the situation stabilizes. 
 
 
U.S. Defense Official Should Refrain from Making Reckless Remarks on 
USFK 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 28, 2009, Page 39) 
 
Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Michael Mullen 
officially explained to the Ministry of National Defense about his 
recent statement that the U.S. is considering sending some USFK 
troops to Iraq or Afghanistan.  He said that the USFK troop level 
would remain unchanged, adding that he made the remark on the USFK's 
overseas redeployment while answering a question from USFK 
servicemen, and it was not an official response.  Consequently, this 
 
SEOUL 00001711  003 OF 004 
 
 
has calmed controversy, but its aftereffects are still lingering. 
 
Adm. Mullen's remark on the pullout of USFK troops flies in the face 
of not only the joint communiqu of the Security Consultative 
Meeting (SCM) but also the USG's position.  During his recent to 
visit to the ROK, Defense Secretary Robert Gates pledged that, in 
the event of a contingency, the U.S. would:   1) quickly bring 
globally available U.S. forces and capabilities to add to the troops 
and equipment it already stations in the ROK and 2) that the U.S. 
will continue to provide extended deterrence to ensure the ROK's 
security.   On the same day, however, Adm. Mullen hinted at the 
possibility of deploying some USFK troops off the Korean Peninsula. 
 
This can be seen a simple difference of personal opinions between 
the U.S. Defense Secretary and the Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, but they may have played their respective roles to induce 
the ROK to send combat troops to Afghanistan.  (Washington) may have 
internally decided to strengthen the USFK's "strategic flexibility." 
 Whatever the reason behind Adm. Mullen's statement, the U.S. troop 
presence and the U.S. troop level in the ROK are directly linked 
with our national security.  This is why we contribute a massive 
amount of money to the USFK's upkeep every year, pay every attention 
to the relocation of the Yongsan Garrison to Pyeongtaek, and have 
been considering seriously providing assistance in the region where 
U.S. troops are stationed. 
 
Regarding the USFK troop level, ROK President Lee Myung-bak and 
former U.S. President George W. Bush agreed last April to freeze 
troop reductions and maintain about 28,500 troops on the peninsula. 
This was reaffirmed two months later, last June, during a meeting 
between Secretary Gates and Minister of National Defense Lee 
Sang-hee, and last December through the remarks by USFK Commander 
Gen. Walter Sharp.  At the ROK-U.S. Summit this past June, U.S. 
President Barack Obama also made it clear that he will adhere to 
this position. 
 
Adm. Mullen's statement was careless.  In the past, Pentagon 
officials often fueled our security concerns by making statements 
similar to the one by Adm. Mullen.  They should not make reckless 
remarks about USFK just in order to resolve other issues.  If they 
(Pentagon officials) need to make demands on the ROK, they should do 
so in an open manner at an official meeting.  That conforms to the 
spirit of the alliance. 
 
 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
Seoul High Court Rules That Information on U.S. Beef Imports Should 
Be Disclosed If They Fail to Pass Quarantine Inspection 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, October 28, 2009, Page 12) 
 
By Reporters Kim Gi-tae and Roh Hyun-ung 
 
The Seoul High Court ruled that detailed information on U.S. beef 
imports should be disclosed if those imports fail to pass quarantine 
inspection. 
 
Just as the lower court did in the original decision, the High Court 
ruled in favor of the plaintiff, the Lawyers for a Democratic 
Society (Minbyun).  (Minbyun originally filed suit against the 
Director of the National Veterinary Research &amp; Quarantine Service 
(NVRQS).)  The High Court said that whether U.S. meat packers comply 
with import standards should be disclosed to dispel (ROK people's 
potential) anxiety over mad cow disease, adding that this disclosure 
will pave the way for quarantine inspections to be implemented in a 
more transparent manner.  Previously, the original court also ruled 
in favor of the plaintiff, saying that whether imported livestock 
products meet quarantine standards is directly related to public 
health and life. 
 
When the ROKG issued a notice on sanitary standards for U.S. beef 
 
SEOUL 00001711  004 OF 004 
 
 
imports in June last year, Minbyun demanded that the Minister of 
Food, Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries reveal information 
regarding the names and addresses of ROK merchants who fail to label 
the origin of beef; the number of violations by U.S. meat plants; 
quantities of disqualified beef imports; and the reasons for 
disqualification.  The NVRQS which carries out quarantine inspection 
has revealed the number of violations by U.S. meat packers and 
quantities of disqualified beef imports, but has not disclosed the 
reasons for disqualification, saying that a disclosure of such 
information may mislead (ROK people) to believe that the U.S. meat 
packers did something terribly wrong by posing a serious threat to 
public health. 
 
Lawyer Song Ki-ho from Minbyun said that according to the 
government's notice, if U.S. meat plants violate quarantine 
standards, the ROKG can take action, including suspending U.S. beef 
exports.  He attached significance to the ruling, saying if 
information on U.S. beef imports are revealed when they fail to pass 
quarantine inspection, ROK people can examine whether the government 
undertakes quarantine inspections as spelled out in the government's 
notice. 
 
Lee Joo-ho, director of the NVRQS said that the decision whether to 
disclose information on U.S. beef was made in consultation with the 
Ministry of Justice and Ministry for Food and Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries.  Lee also noted that the NVRQS will decide whether to 
appeal to the Supreme Court or reveal the information after 
discussions with related ministries. 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>