^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1495  |  2009-09-18  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론보도; 2009년 9월 18일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001495

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
[[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=82960|제 목: 서울, 언론보도; 2009년 9월 18일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/01/21 13:24//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 세계일보, 모든 텔레비전
'서민 은행' 문연다

중앙일보
이들에겐 '기부 DNA'가 있다

동아일보
[[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01100401.20090918100006144|국고지원 67개 사업비 3배로 늘어]]

한국일보, 서울신문
한은법 윤-이 충돌

한겨레 신문
민자사업 손실, 세금으로 1조5천억 메웠다

===== 국내 동향 =====

과거 핵 협상과정에서 번번이 북한에 당해온 한미(韓美)가 같은 실패를 반복하지 않기 위해 새로운 전략을 마련 중이다. '채찍은 놓고 당근을 주며' 협상을 하다가, 결정적인 핵 폐기 문턱 앞까지 이르면 북한이 다시 핵 협박으로 되돌아 가며 파이를 키우는 사이클을 끊기 위해서다. (조선)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

북한 조선 중앙통신은 중국 다이빙궈 외교담당국무위원이 16일 후진타오 국가주석의 특사자격으로 북한을 방문해 강석주 외무성 제1부상과 회담했으며 조(북한)·중 관계와 지역, 국제 문제에 대해 "허심탄회하고 깊이 있는 의견 교환을 진행했다"고 전했다. (조선, 동아, 한국, 한겨레, 세계, 서울, 모든 텔레비전)

미국이 북한에 비핵화 대가로 제시할 수 있는 경제적 인센티브로는 수교, 무역협정 체결, 제재 완화, 국제금융기구 가입 허용, 에너지 및 식량 지원, 개성공단 제품에 대한 특별관세 적용 등 크게 6가지가 있을 수 있다고 미 의회조사국(CRS)이 최신 보고서에서 분석했다. (중앙, 동아, 한국, 한겨레, 세계, 서울)

일본의 오카다 가쓰야 신임 외무상은 18일 기자회견에서 북한이 일본인 납북자 문제 해결에 나서지 않는다면 북한과 협상하지 않을 것이라고 말했다. (조선)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

보수 조선일보는 <北核 폐기까진 '채찍'뿐… '당근'은 없다>는 제하의 내부 지면 기사를 게재했다. 조선은 "과거 핵 협상과정에서 번번이 북한에 당해온 한미(韓美)가 같은 실패를 반복하지 않기 위해 새로운 전략을 마련 중이다."며 "'채찍은 놓고 당근을 주며' 협상을 하다가, 결정적인 핵 폐기 문턱 앞까지 이르면 북한이 다시 핵 협박으로 되돌아 가며 파이를 키우는 사이클을 끊기 위해서다"고 말했다.

동 기사에 힘을 실어 주듯 조선은 유명환 외교부 장관이 17일 국회 의원들에게 "미국은 추후 북한과의 협상이 재개되더라도 북한의 가시적인 비핵화 조치가 확보되지 않는 한 유엔 안보리 제재를 계속 이행할 것"이라고 말했다고 전했다.

조선 사설: "미국은 6자회담의 틀에서 미·북 대화를 추진하겠다고 밝히고 있다. 이 말은 대북 인센티브에 담길 경제적 부담을 나눠 지자는 뜻도 담고 있다. 북한에 매만 맞으면서 매값은 거의 혼자 도맡다시피 한 한국이 고도의 협상력을 발휘해야 할 시기가 다가오고 있는 것이다."

대다수 한국 언론은 미 의회조사국(CRS) 보고서에 관심을 보였다. CRS는 보고서에서 미국이 북한에 비핵화 대가로 제시할 수 있는 경제적 인센티브로는 수교, 무역협정 체결, 제재 완화, 국제금융기구 가입 허용, 에너지 및 식량 지원, 개성공단 제품에 대한 특별관세 적용 등 크게 6가지가 있을 수 있다고 적시했다.

대다수 언론은 16일 후진타오 국가 주석의 특사인 다이빙궈가 평양에서 강석주 외무성 제1부상과 회담한 소식을 다루었다.

보수 조선일보는 방북 중인 다이빙궈 국무위원은 10월 4~6일로 예정돼 있는 원자바오(溫家寶) 총리의 방북에 앞서 김정일 위원장과의 정상회담 일정과 의제를 준비하기 위함이지만, 방북 대표단에 우다웨이 6자회담 수석 대표도 포함될 걸로 볼 때 북한의 핵 프로그램도 논의 중이라는 추론이 있다고 말했다.

보수 동아일보는 중국이 고위급 특사를 북한에 파견한 것은 한반도 비핵화 문제에 관한 6자회담 협상에서 주도적인 역할을 유지할 뜻을 내비친 것이라고 논평했다.

좌파 성향 한겨레신문의 기사 제목: <평양 간 다이빙궈 무슨 얘기 건넸을까/중국 물밑중재 잰걸음…‘북 6자회담 복귀' 설득한 듯>

==== 오바마 대통령의 미사일방어 결정 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 오바마 대통령이 체코와 폴란드에 도입하려는 미국 미사일 방어 시스템 계획을 백지화하기로 했다는 소식에 관심을 보였다.

복수의 신문은 다음과 같은 제하의 기사를 게재했다: <美, MD(미사일 방어)계획 대수술… 러시아와 화해 돌파구; 美 보수진영은 강력 반발> (보수 조선일보); <오바마 “유럽 MD계획 백지화”; 부시 정책 뒤집어 러시아와 관계 개선> (중도 우파 중앙일보); <미, 동유럽 MD<미사일방어체제> 포기/"이란 미사일 위협 줄어"> (좌파 성향 한겨레 신문)

===== 사설/논단 =====

[사설] 북핵 포기와 대북 지원 한꺼번에 맞바꿔야(조선일보, 2009년 9월 18일, 39면)

힐러리 클린턴 미국 국무장관은 15일(현지 시각) 다음달쯤 시작될 미·북 대화에서 북한이 비핵화에 응하면 받게 될 '정치적 약속과 경제적 지원(인센티브)' 그리고 비핵화에 나서지 않을 경우 북한에 가해질 제재와 압박의 내용을 북측에 전달하겠다고 말했다. 미국 의회조사국(CRS)은 최근 펴낸 보고서에서 대북 인센티브의 예로 미·북 수교, 대북 제재 완화, 에너지·식량 지원 등을 꼽으면서 세계은행(WB)이나 아시아개발은행(ADB)에 북한의 경제 전환 지원을 위한 특별 펀드를 설치하는 방안도 고려할 수 있다고 밝혔다.

미국은 과거에도 비핵화 문제를 둘러싼 북한과의 협상에서 북한 체제 보장 등을 서면으로 약속했고, 경수로 건설 및 식량 지원 등 각종 인센티브 제공을 조건으로 북한과의 합의를 이끌어냈었다. 그러나 북한은 지난 5월 플루토늄을 이용한 2차 핵실험을 실시했고, 최근 유엔 안보리에 서한을 보내 그간 자신들이 부인해온 우라늄의 핵무기화가 완성 단계에 이르렀다고 밝혔다.

이번에도 이런 과거의 잘못을 되풀이해선 안 된다. 그러려면 비핵화 조치를 여러 단계로 쪼개 단계마다 인센티브를 내놓으라고 요구하는 북한의 협상 전술에 말려들어서는 안 된다. 북한은 과거의 비핵화 합의 때도 영변 원자로의 동결과 불능화라는 1·2단계 조치만 취하고선 그때마다 경제적 지원을 받아내다가 실질적 비핵화 단계에 이르면 이런저런 트집을 잡아 합의를 깨면서 영변 원자로를 다시 가동하곤 했다. 따라서 대북 인센티브는 북한이 되돌릴 수 없는 비핵화 조치를 취할 때에만 제공되도록 해야 한다.

미국은 6자회담의 틀에서 미·북 대화를 추진하겠다고 밝히고 있다. 이 말은 대북 인센티브에 담길 경제적 부담을 나눠 지자는 뜻도 담고 있다. 북한에 매만 맞으면서 매값은 거의 혼자 도맡다시피 한 한국이 고도의 협상력을 발휘해야 할 시기가 다가오고 있는 것이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

===== 특집 =====

北核 폐기까진 '채찍'뿐… '당근'은 없다(조선일보, 2009년 9월 18일 6면)

안용현 기자

15년 넘는 핵 협상과정에서 번번이 북한에 당해온 한미(韓美)가 같은 실패를 반복하지 않기 위해 새로운 전략을 마련 중이다. '채찍은 놓고 당근을 주며' 협상을 하다가, 결정적인 핵 폐기 문턱 앞까지 이르면 북한이 다시 핵 협박으로 되돌아 가며 파이를 키우는 사이클을 끊기 위해서다.

한미는 대북 협상에서 실패가 반복돼온 결정적인 원인이 핵 폐기라는 목적지에 이르기 전에 중간 기착지를 두는 단계별 합의 방식에 있었다고 보고, '핵 폐기 전까지는 제재는 계속되고 보상은 없다'는 원칙을 세운 것으로 알려졌다. 핵 폐기까지의 단계를 잘게 잘게 쪼개서 각종 당근을 챙겨온 북한의 전술에 더 이상 말려들지 않겠다는 것이다.

유명환 외교부 장관은 17일 국회 외교통일위원회에서 "미국은 추후 북한과의 협상이 재개되더라도 북한의 가시적인 비핵화 조치가 확보되지 않는 한 유엔 안보리 제재를 계속 이행할 것"이라고 했다.

그는 "우리 정부도 북한이 가시적 비핵화 조치를 취할 때까지 대북 제재를 충실히 이행해 나가고 이와 동시에 대화의 문을 열어둬 북한이 진지한 자세로 6자회담에 복귀하도록 유도한다는 기존의 대응 기조를 견지할 것"이라고 했다.

또 다른 정부 고위당국자는 "북한이 핵 폐기를 행동으로 옮기기 전까지 (과거와 같은) 보상은 없을 것"이라고 했다. 북한이 핵을 포기하면 대폭적인 지원을 할 수 있지만, 그 지원 목록은 오직 '되돌이킬 수 없는 핵 폐기' 이후에만 해당된다는 것이다. 과거처럼 핵을 포기하겠다는 '말' 또는 '되돌릴 수 있는 행동'에 대한 보상을 주는 일은 없을 것이라고 이 당국자는 강조했다.

이런 언급들은 한·미가 북한의 '당근 먹고 튀기'와 '제재를 피하며 시간 벌기' 전술에 더 이상 당하지 않겠다는 의미로 분석된다. "북핵 문제 접근법에서 큰 틀에서의 근본적 변화"(정부 고위당국자)가 필요하다는 것이다.

…북한은 그동안의 핵 협상에서 '살라미(얇게 썰어먹는 이탈리아 소시지) 전술'을 써왔다. 비핵화 단계를 폐쇄(Shut down)→불능화(Disablement)→폐기(dismantlement) 등으로 잘게 썰어 놓은 뒤 폐기 전까지 대화를 명목으로 제재를 피했다. 그러다가 폐기 단계에 들어서려면 다시 협상을 '원점'으로 되돌리는 수법을 반복했다.

이명박 대통령이 지난 6월 오마바(Obama) 미국 대통령에게 제안했던 '포괄적 패키지'도 "대북접근법에 근본적인 변화가 필요하다는 맥락에서 나온 것"이라고 정부 고위당국자는 전했다. 그러나 표현이 과거 김대중 전 대통령의 '패키지 딜'과 혼선을 일으켜 북한에 '선물 보따리'를 주는 것처럼 보이는 것이 정부로선 고민스러운 대목이다. 그래서 '불가역적 딜(Irreversibe deal·돌이킬 수 없는 협상)' 등 다른 이름을 쓰는 방안이 논의되고 있다.

북한은 2005년 9·19 공동성명에서 "모든 현존하는 핵 시설의 불능화"와 "중유 100만t 상당의 에너지 지원"을 맞바꾸자는 약속을 했다. '행동 대 행동' 원칙을 앞세워 고철이 돼가는 영변 핵 시설의 스위치를 하나씩 끌 때마다 당근을 챙겼다. 그래서 지금까지 중유 75만t 상당의 에너지 지원을 받았다. 2008년 6월에는 영변 냉각탑 '폭파쇼'로 미국으로부터 테러지원국 해제를 얻어냈다. 그러나 북한은 올해 대외 강공책을 쓰면서 그동안의 불능화 조치를 일거에 되돌렸다. 지난 4일에는 "폐연료봉 재처리로 추출된 플루토늄이 무기화되고 있다"(조선중앙통신)고 발표했다. 외교 당국자는 "우리가 지원한 중유는 되돌릴 수 없고, 북한이 약속한 핵 시설 불능화는 언제든 되돌릴 수 있는 협상이 말이 되느냐"고 했다.

청와대 당국자는 "앞으로 9·19 성명과 같은 단계적 합의나, 2·13 합의처럼 돌이킬 수 있는 불능화를 담은 협상은 하지 않을 것"이라고 했다.

"곧바로 본론인 검증 가능한 폐기 단계로 가서 북한이 핵 무기와 핵 물질, 핵 시설 등을 북한 밖으로 완전히 옮기면 체제 보장과 함께 북한판 '마셜 계획'(대규모 경제 지원) 등을 진행하는 협상을 할 것이란 의미"(김성한 교수)란 관측이다.

이런 맥락에서 일본 아사히 신문이 이날 "한·미 정부가 북한의 핵 폐기 대가로 김정일 위원장을 정점으로 하는 북한의 현 체제 존속을 인정하는 방안을 검토하고 있다"고 복수의 6자회담 소식통을 인용, 보도해 눈길을 끈다. 신문은 현재의 정전협정을 평화협정으로 전환하고, 대규모 경제 지원 등을 제안할 가능성이 있다고도 했다.

미국 의회조사국(CRS)은 최근 발간한 '북한, 경제 지렛대와 정책 분석' 보고서에서 6가지를 북한에 줄 수 있는 '인센티브' 가능 항목으로 꼽았다.

①미·북 수교 ②무역협정 체결 ③대북 제재 완화 ④북한의 국제금융기구 가입 허용 ⑤에너지·식량 지원 ⑥개성공단 제품에 대한 특혜. 힐러리 클린턴(Clinton) 미 국무장관은 지난 15일 미북 양자접촉을 하면 북한이 비핵화를 이행할 경우의 인센티브와 그렇지 않을 경우의 결과를 분명히 북한에 전달하겠다는 입장을 밝혔다.

(이 기사는 조선일보가 제공한 번역이다. (우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 마지막 문단을 추가하였다.)

토콜라
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1495.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; September 18, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, All TVs 
2 Trillion Won in Microcredit Planned for Low-income Households 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
11 Members of "Honor Society" Have "DNA for Donation" 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
67 Government-funded Projects See Costs Triple 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
Finance Minister, Central Bank Governor Clash over Central Bank 
Reform 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
1.5 Trillion Won of Taxpayers' Money Spent to Make Up for Losses 
from Privately-funded Construction Projects 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
Seoul and Washington are working out a new strategy toward North 
Korea in order not to repeat their past failures in negotiations 
with North Korea and to end the North's cycle of provocations, 
conciliatory gestures and stalling for time to win concessions. 
(Chosun) 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to North Korea's Korean Central News Agency, Dai Bingguo, 
special envoy of Chinese President Hu Jintao, met in Pyongyang 
yesterday with the North's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju, 
and they had a "candid and in-depth exchange of views" on bilateral, 
regional and international issues. (Chosun, Dong-a, Hankook, 
Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul, all TVs) 
 
The U.S. Congressional Research Service, in its latest report, said 
that Washington may be able to provide six major economic incentives 
to North Korea in return for its denuclearization: normalize 
bilateral ties, lift sanctions, sign a trade treaty, allow the North 
to join international financial institutions, provide energy and 
food aid, and offer preferential tariffs on goods produced at the 
Kaesong Industrial Complex. (JoongAng, Dong-a, Hankook, Hankyoreh, 
Segye, Seoul) 
 
Japan's new Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada told a press conference 
yesterday that Japan will not negotiate with North Korea unless the 
North takes action to resolve the issue of abductees. (Chosun) 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo ran an inside-page report entitled "Only 
'Sticks,' Not 'Carrots,' Until N. Korea Dismantles Its Nuclear 
Program."   It said that Seoul and Washington are working out a new 
strategy toward North Korea in order not to repeat their past 
failures in negotiations with North Korea and to end the North's 
cycle of provocations, conciliatory gestures and stalling for time 
to win concessions. 
 
As support for this report, Chosun quoted Foreign Minister Yu 
Myung-hwan as telling lawmakers yesterday that even if talks with 
North Korea resume the U.S. will continue to implement UN Security 
Council sanctions against North Korea, unless the North takes 
tangible steps toward denuclearization.  Another senior ROKG 
 
SEOUL 00001495  002 OF 005 
 
 
official was also quoted: "There will be no compensation until North 
Korea takes action to denuclearize." 
 
Chosun editorialized: "The U.S. is saying that it will pursue 
bilateral talks with North Korea within the context of the Six-Party 
Talks.  This means sharing the economic burden in providing 
incentives to North Korea.  The time is approaching for Seoul to 
exercise high-level negotiating skills, given that the ROK has been 
almost solely responsible for such incentives while being ignored by 
the North." 
 
Most ROK media gave attention to the U.S. Congressional Research 
Service (CRS)'s latest report, in which the CRS said that Washington 
may be able to provide six major economic incentives to North Korea 
in return for its denuclearization: normalize bilateral ties, lift 
sanctions, sign a trade treaty, allow the North to join 
international financial institutions, provide energy and food aid 
and preferential tariffs on goods produced at the Kaesong Industrial 
Complex. 
 
Most media also gave coverage to yesterday's meeting in Pyongyang 
between Dai Bingguo, special envoy of Chinese President Hu Jintao, 
and North Korea's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo observed that the Chinese State Councilor 
is in Pyongyang to prepare the schedule and agenda for Chinese 
Premier Wen Jiabao's visit to the country slated for Oct. 4-6 but 
that there is speculation that the North's nuclear program is also 
under discussion, given that the delegation also includes Chinese 
Chief Nuclear Negotiator Wu Dawei. 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo commented that it appears that China, by 
sending a high-level envoy to North Korea, intends to maintain its 
leadership role in the Six Party negotiations on denuclearizing the 
Korean Peninsula. 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun headlined its story: "China Scrambles 
to Mediate Behind the Scenes... It Seems to Have Persuaded N. Korea 
to Return to Six-Party Talks" 
 
 
- President Obama's Missile Defense Decision 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Most ROK media gave attention to President Barack Obama's decision 
to scrap plans for a U.S. missile defense system in the Czech 
Republic and Poland. 
 
Newspapers carried the following headlines: "U.S. Shelves Eastern 
Europe Missile Defense Program; Russia Welcomes It but Conservative 
Circles, the Czech Republic and Poland Protest" (conservative Chosun 
Ilbo); "Obama Seeks Improved Relations with Russia by Reversing a 
Bush Administration Policy" (right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo); and 
"U.S. Gives Up Eastern Europe MD Citing Reduced Iranian Missile 
Threats... Change Expected in U.S. Global Defense Strategy" 
(left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun.) 
 
Opinions/Editorials 
------------------- 
 
N. Korea Should Not Get Anything Until It Denuclearizes 
(Chosun Ilbo, September 18, 2009, Page 39) 
 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Tuesday said she intends 
to explain to North Korea the incentives it can expect if it agrees 
to dismantle its nuclear program, as well as the consequences if it 
does not.  In a recent report, the U.S. Congressional Research 
Service named as possible incentives the normalization of diplomatic 
relations, the lifting of sanctions, and energy and food aid.  CRS 
said the World Bank or the Asian Development Bank could set up a 
special fund to support North Korea's economic transformation. 
 
In previous negotiations with North Korea over nuclear 
dismantlement, the U.S. made written promises, including a pledge to 
 
SEOUL 00001495  003 OF 005 
 
 
respect the sovereignty of the regime, and offered incentives such 
as food aid and the construction of a light water reactor.  Despite 
all that, North Korea conducted a second nuclear test in May and 
recently told the UN Security Council that it has reached the "final 
stage" of enriching uranium for weapons purposes. 
 
These mistakes must not be repeated.  The U.S. must not fall into 
North Korea's trap of slicing its nuclear dismantlement process into 
many different phases, demanding incentives for each stage.  In past 
negotiations, North Korea lived up to only the first and second 
stages of its pledge by freezing and disabling the reactor in 
Yongbyon, and was lavishly rewarded each time. But it put up one 
excuse after another when it came to actually dismantling its 
nuclear program and later restarted the Yongbyon reactor.  From now 
on, it must be given incentives only when it irreversibly dismantles 
its nuclear facilities. 
 
The U.S. is saying that it will pursue bilateral talks with North 
Korea within the context of the Six-Party Talks.  This means sharing 
the economic burden in providing incentives to North Korea.  The 
time is approaching for Seoul to exercise high-level negotiating 
skills, given that the ROK has been almost solely responsible for 
such incentives while being ignored by the North. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
Only "Sticks," Not "Carrots," Until N. Korea Dismantles Its Nuclear 
Program 
(Chosun Ilbo, September 18, 2009, Page 6) 
 
By Reporter Ahn Yong-hyun 
 
Seoul and Washington are working out a new strategy toward North 
Korea in order not to repeat their past failures in the over 15-year 
negotiations with North Korea and to end the North's cycle of 
provocations, conciliatory gestures and stalling for time to win 
concessions. 
 
The two allies are apparently determined to maintain sanctions 
against the North until it denuclearizes.  They believe their 
mistake in the past has been to use a piecemeal approach to 
negotiations that immediately rewarded the North for every small, 
reversible step. 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan told the National Assembly's Foreign 
Affairs, Trade and Unification Committee on Thursday, "Even if talks 
with North Korea resume, the U.S. will continue to implement UN 
Security Council sanctions against North Korea, unless the North 
takes tangible steps toward denuclearization." 
 
"This government too will maintain the existing policy of faithfully 
implementing sanctions against the North until it takes verifiable 
steps to end its nuclear program.  At the same time, we'll keep the 
dialogue door open to persuade the North to return to the Six-Party 
Talks," he added. 
 
A senior government official said, "There will be no compensation 
until North Korea takes action to denuclearize."  In other words, if 
North Korea abandons its nuclear ambitions, it will be provided with 
massive aid, but the aid will come only after the "irreversible 
dismantlement of North Korea's nuclear programs."  The official 
stressed that there will be no rewards for a "reversible behavior" 
or a simple "promise" to abandon nuclear programs. 
 
All the signs are that Seoul and Washington are determined not to 
fall again for the North's cycle of provocations, conciliatory 
gestures and stalling for time to win concessions.  As a senior 
government official has suggested, the ROK and the U.S. need "basic 
changes to the larger framework in their approach to the North 
Korean nuclear issue." 
 
SEOUL 00001495  004 OF 005 
 
 
 
North Korea has often avoided sanctions by agreeing to dialogue, 
slicing the denuclearization process into smaller stages, from 
"shutdown," via "disablement" to "dismantlement," and pulling out 
before the process is complete. 
 
The senior ROKG official noted, "The 'comprehensive package' that 
President Lee Myung-bak proposed to U.S. President Obama this past 
June also came in the context of a fundamental change being needed 
in an approach toward North Korea.  However, the ROKG is concerned 
that the term may be confused with the "package deal" from the 
previous Kim Dae-jung Administration, thereby giving an impression 
that North Korea is presented with a "bundle of gifts."  Therefore, 
the ROKG is considering using different terms, such as an 
"irreversible deal." 
 
In the September 19, 2005 Joint Statement, North Korea promised to 
disable all its existing nuclear facilities in return for energy aid 
equivalent to 1 million tons of heavy fuel oil.  While adhering to 
the "action-for-action" principle, North Korea earned rewards 
whenever it switched off the outdated nuclear facilities at Yongbyon 
one by one.  So far, the North has been provided with energy aid 
equivalent to 750,000 tons of heavy fuel aid.  In June, 2008, after 
blowing up a cooling tower at Yongbyon, the nation was removed from 
the State Department's list of states that sponsor terrorism. 
However, while engaging in belligerent moves this year, Pyongyang 
retracted all its disablement steps at one stroke.  The (North) 
Korean Central News Agency reported on September 4, "Reprocessing of 
spent fuel rods is at its final phase and extracted plutonium is 
being weaponized."  An ROKG foreign policy official said, "Does it 
make sense to have negotiations under which our provision of heavy 
fuel oil is irreversible but North Korea's nuclear disablement steps 
are reversible at any time?" 
 
A Blue House official said, "We won't engage in talks that might 
result in stage-by-stage agreements like the statement of principles 
in the fourth round of the Six-Party Talks in Sept. 19, 2005, or 
talks that might lead to an agreement on disablement that is 
reversible like the Feb. 13, 2007 deal." 
 
Prof. Kim Sung-han of Korea University said Seoul and Washington 
would "conduct talks to launch a North Korean version of  the 
Marshall Plan," the large-scale economic aid program for postwar 
Europe, "as well as security guarantees if the North goes directly 
to the stage of verifiable dismantlement and completely removes its 
nuclear weapons, nuclear materials and nuclear facilities 
overseas." 
 
In addition, Japan's Asahi Shimbun carried a noteworthy report 
quoting Six-Party Talks sources as saying that the ROK and U.S. 
governments are reviewing a plan to officially recognize the current 
North Korean regime led by Kim Jong-il in return for the North's 
nuclear dismantlement.  The newspaper also reported that there is a 
possibility that the ROK and the U.S. governments may propose to 
replace the current armistice agreement with a peace treaty and 
provide massive economic assistance to Pyongyang. 
 
The Congressional Research Service (CRS) has recently released a 
report on "North Korea: Economic Leverage and Policy Analysis," 
which spells out six incentives the U.S. could provide to the North. 
 The incentives include normalizing diplomatic ties, signing a trade 
treaty, lifting sanctions, allowing the North to join international 
financial institutions, providing energy and food aid and giving 
preferential treatment to goods produced at the Kaesong Industrial 
Complex.  U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on September 
15 that when U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks take place, the U.S. 
will explain to North Korea the incentives it can get if it pursues 
denuclearization and the consequences if it doesn't. 
 
[This is a translation provided by the newspaper.  We have compared 
the English version on the website with the Korean version and added 
some paragraphs to make them identical.] 
 
 
 
SEOUL 00001495  005 OF 005 
 
 
TOKOLA 
</file>