^  참조문서번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1241  |  2009-08-06 06:45  |  기밀(3급)  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PGOV PREL KS KN}}  |
====== 제 목: 미 의회 대표 버먼 방한 관련 무대 연출 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 001241 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 08/06/2019 
태그: PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL(([External Political Relations])), KS(([Korea (South)])), KN(([Korea (North)])) 
제 목: 미 의회 대표 버먼 방한 관련 무대 연출
분류자: 공관차석 마크 토콜라.((번역 주: Deputy Chief of Mission Mark A. Tokola. )) 근거 1.4 (b),  (d). 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/01/19 23:41//
===== 요점 =====
1. (기밀) 요점: 미 의회 대표단 버먼 귀하, 한국에 오신 걸 환영합니다. 한미 동맹은 공고하고 항구적이며, 전략적으로 중요합니다. 당신의 방한은 6월 16일 한미 정상회담의 성공적인 개최와 공동비전성명 채택 이후에 이뤄지는 방문입니다. 한국에서 공동비전성명에 대해 호응이 좋은 이유는 (미국의 핵우산 보장과 한국에 대한 확대억제(擴大抑制)((번역 주: 미국이 그 동맹국이나 그것에 준하는 비핵보유국에 대한핵공격·협박을 억제하는 것을 미·소(러)간의 ‘일반적 억제’라고 하는 것에 반해, 미국의 ‘확대억제’ 또는 ‘핵의 우산’이라고 한다.))를 비롯한) 양국의 안보관계의 지속적인 강화를 다짐하고, 21세기 한미 관계가 수반하는 내용의 윤곽이 제시되어 있기 때문입니다. 우리가 이러한 비전을 실현하려면 역내에서나 세계 무대에서 양국의 협력을 계속해서 확대할 필요가 있습니다. 역내 안보 면에서, 특히 북한의 계속되는 호전적인 군사태세와 김정일의 건강 악화를 고려할 때 한국 당국자들에게 중요합니다. 미국과 마찬가지로 한국은 6자 회담을 지지하며, 우리가 북한을 핵보유국으로 인정하지 말아야 한다는 뜻은 확고부동합니다. 당신의 남측 대화 상대역들은 제시된 긴급 대책 계획과 북한 비핵화 전망에 대해 당신이 어떤 시각으로 보는지에 큰 관심을 두고 있습니다.

2. 워싱턴 정가에서 한미 FTA를 위한 동력을 생성할 능력의 부재로 인해 이명박 대통령은 그의 반대자들로부터 비난을 받아왔습니다. 한미 FTA 비준은 미국의 북동아시아에 대한 헌신의 징표로써 여겨지고 있습니다. 4월 이명박과 함께한 G20 회의에서 미국이 FTA를 앞당기는 방안을 찾길 원한다는 오바마 대통령의 성명은 한국정부 내의 불안감이 다소 완화되었고, 이명박이 국회 사법위원회를 통한 한미 FTA 추진을 가능하게 했습니다. 본회의 표결은 아직 잡히지 않았습니다. 반대 목소리가 켜지는 가운데, 여론 조사에서 한미 FTA는 한국민의 60% 지지율을 계속 받고 있으며, 다수당인 한나라당의 강력한 지원을 받고 있어, 워싱턴에서 움직임이 있게 되면 바로 한미 FTA는 본회의에서 통과될 것입니다. 오바마 정부는 철저한 한미 FTA 검토를 실행하고 있으며, 모든 이해당사자가 가진 우려 사항의 정확한 성격을 이해하도록 그들과 긴밀히 협의하고 있으며, 해당 우려를 해결하기 위한 권고 사항을 개발하고 있습니다. 이러한 검토를 지원하고, 동 자유무역협정에 이해관계가 있는 모든 이들이 견해를 충분히 개진하도록 담보하기 위해 우리는 2009년 7월 27일 연방관보 고시를 발행하고 한미 FTA에 관한 의견을 요청했습니다. 요약 끝.
===== 배경 =====
3. (기밀) 생기 넘치는 민주주의, 자유시장, 첨단기술 경제, 고학력 인구, 언론 자유, 갈수록 깊이를 더해 가는 미국민과 한국민 사이 연대감 등 한국은 은 단연 돋보이는 성공담이며, 미국 외교정책의 성공이고도 합니다. 1948년 국교 수립 이후로 우리의 강도 높은 한국 참여는 클린턴 국무부 장관이 미국 외교정책을 윤곽을 설명하며 언급한 국방, 외교, 개발이라는 세 가지 기둥의 중요성을 증명하는 사례입니다. 남한의 성공 밑바탕에는 여전히 한반도에 28,000명의 미군 병력이 주둔하는 점에서 보듯 국방에 대한 양국의 헌신, 한국전쟁 이후 미국이 제공한 상당한 개발원조, 더욱 안정되고 번영하는 동북아 지역 미래와 북한 비핵화를 달성하기 위한 긴밀한 외교 협력 등이 기초가 되었습니다.

4. (기밀) 현재는 검증을 거친 민주주의 제도를 가진 하나의 선진국으로서 한국은 역내와 세계적으로 더 큰 역할을 맡겠다는 정치적인 의지만이 아닌 갈수록 능력도 보유하고 있습니다. 당신의 방문은 인권의 전파와 기후변화, 해적, 대테러리즘까지 다양한 현안에 관하여 더 적극적인 미국의 동반자가 되도록 당신의 대화 상대역들을 장려할 것입니다. 미국은 상당한 능력을 보유한 한국이란 동맹국과 가치관과 전략적 목표를 공유하고 있습니다; 한미관계를 글로벌 파트너쉽으로 격상시키기 위한 양국의 열망을 실체화시킬 필요가 있습니다.
===== 국내 상황 =====
5. (기밀) 중도 우파인 한나라당 소속 이 대통령은 2008년 2월에 5년 단임제 임기를 시작하면서 중도 좌파 대통령 10년 통치를 종식했습니다. 2008년 4월 한나라당은 단원제 국회에서 주요 야당인 민주당에 맞서 견고한 다수의석을 확보했습니다. 그러나 총선에서 한나라당이 성공하긴 했지만, 그 저변에는 미디어 개혁법, 노동관계, 세제 정책, 교육 등과 같은 국내 정치 현안에 대한 남한 국민 사이 공감대가 부족합니다. 이 대통령은 취임 이래로 특히 작년에 미국산 쇠고기를 한국 시장에 재개방하는 결정 이후에 30%대의 낮은 지지율로 고전해왔습니다. 국회에서 한나라당과 민주당은 이 대통령보다 더 낮은 지지율을 보이면서, 국내 의제에서 사실상 꽉 막힌 결과를 낳았습니다.

6. (기밀) 이 대통령은 공개석상에서 국회 내부의 다툼에 관여하지 않았고, 외교정책과 자원외교, 녹색성장에 관한 국제 협력시도, 기후변화, 경제위기 극복에 초점을 맞추고 있습니다. 그는 선거 공약으로 한미동맹을 강화를 내걸었고, 대체로 성공적이었다고 보여 집니다. 그는 중국, 러시아와도 경제 및 정치적 유대관계를 크게 확대했습니다. 그는 한국의 실용적 이해를 바탕으로 한 한일 유대관계 발전시키기 위해 일본과의 역사적 적대감을 극복하려고 했지만, 일본의 한국 식민지 건설에 대한 민감성은 그 뿌리가 깊습니다. 이 대통령은 시야를 넓혀서 동남아시아, 중앙아시아, 유럽과의 새로운 유대관계를 활발하게 구축하고 있습니다.

7. (기밀) 김대중 전임 대통령의 건강이 악화하고 있으며, 서울 소재 병원 중환자실에 현재 입원해 있습니다. 84세로 1998~2003년 봉직한 김 대통령의 예후(豫後)가 좋지 않습니다.
===== 한미동맹 =====
8. (기밀) 반세기에 걸쳐 한미 동맹은 북동아시아 평화와 번영을 위한 토대를 제공했습니다. 한국은 크게 수혜를 입었습니다: 경제적으로 “한강의 기적”이나 한국 민주주의의 만개 모두 미국의 방패막이나 경제적 원조와 지원이 없었다면 불가능했을 것입니다. 미국 역시 수혜를 입었습니다. 주한미군은 유일하게 동아시아 본토에 주둔한 미군입니다. 남한은 주한미군 운영비용에 수십억 달러를 출연하고 있습니다.

9. (기밀) 한미 정상회담 공동비전성명은 역내와 세계적인 한미 동맹의 역할을 확대하는 강력한 비전을 제공합니다. 미국은 한반도 상에 용산기지이전사업, 연합토지관리계획, 전략적 이양계획으로 알려진 양국의 3대 핵심 변혁 협정을 구현함으로써 한미안보 관계를 강화하고, 그 폭을 확대하여 한미 안보관계를 진화시키기 위한 작업을 하고 있습니다.
  * 용산기지이전사업(YRP): 용산기지 이전사업은 주한미군 본부를 서울의 중심부에서 서울 남쪽에 특별히 만들어진 전쟁수행 본부로 이전하는 것으로, 역사적으로 일제 강점기와 관련된 대규모 부지를 한국민에게 돌려주는 것이며, 그곳을 공원으로 변모시킬 계획을 하고 있습니다. 용산기지이전사업의 구현 과정은 계속되고 있으며, 이전사업의 중심지인 험프리스 기지를 준비하기 위한 건설이 계속 예정되어 있지만, 걸림돌에 부딪혔습니다. 만일 미국이 2014년 합의된 완료 일자를 맞추려면 이 대통령과 한국 정부의 지원이 요구됩니다.
 
  * 연합토지관리계획(LPP): 연합토지관리계획은 한국 전역에 흩어져 있는 100개가 넘는 미군기지를 한강 이남 소재 두 개의 주요 전략적 중심지로 통폐합하는 것으로 한국 전쟁 끝물의 낡은 군사적 발자취를 현대적이고 입지가 좋은 군사태세로 대체하는 것입니다. 한국의 국방부는 연합토지관리계획을 2015년 말까지 완성하려 합니다.

  * 전략적 이양계획(STP): 전략적 이양계획은 남한 병력에 대한 전시 작전통제권을 미군에서 한국군으로 2012년 4월 17일까지 이양하는 절차입니다. (최근 북한의 핵 실험 주장 이후) 2012년 4월 17일 이양 일자와 관련해 국내 반대파들의 감시가 늘고 있기 때문에 이 대통령은 전시작전권 이양에 대한 집중조명을 피할 필요가 있다고 강조해왔습니다. 우리는 전작권 이양 개편의 가치를 강조하기 위해 한미안보협의회의, 공보, 대중의 인식 관리를 통한 전시작전권 이양 과정의 긴밀한 협력을 통한 검토 과정을 강조하고 있습니다.

10. (기밀) 미국은 두 가지 이전계획인 용산기지이전사업과 연합토지관리계획을 통한 주한미군 변혁 완성이 중요함을 계속 강조해야만 합니다. 이들 협정은 2004년에 서명됐지만, 적절한 기금이 수반되지 않았습니다. 2007년에 끝낸 시설종합계획은 비용과 추진일정을 마련했지만, 한국정부는 아직 국회에 대해 기금 요청을 하지 못하였습니다. 다른 미국 및 한국 민간 부분 계획안들은 그러한 기금 상의 공백을 메우지 못하고 있습니다. 결과적으로 본래 2008년 완성 예정인 동맹 변혁 일정이 수년 이상 지연된 상태에 봉착했습니다. 추가적인 연기를 피하고자 한국정부는 반드시 이들 이전사업을 급선무로 구현해야만 합니다. 우리 쪽도 반드시 자체 급선무를 일관되고 선명하게 식별해내야만 합니다.

11. (기밀) 미국과 한국이 협력할 세계 안보 문제 영역을 확대하기에 지금이 적기입니다. 당신께서 한국이 자체 세계안보역할을 확대할 준비가 되었을 만한 아래와 같은 영역을 제기하길 아마 원하실 것입니다:
  * 아프간 : 한국정부는 바그람에 각 한 개씩 새 병원과 훈련소 건설을 비롯해 구급차, 오토바이, 경찰 훈련요원의 지원 등 더 많은 아프간 원조와 훈련을 제공할 계획입니다. 그러나 미국은 특히 아프간 국군에 대한 금융 지원에 대해 한국의 지원이 훨씬 많이 필요합니다. 그러한 목적으로 우리는 5년 동안에 한해에 미화 1억 달러씩을 요청했습니다. 이는 한국정부에 요청한 미국정부의 주된 요청사항입니다. 한국정부는 지방재건팀 아프간 파견을 고려하고 있는데, 우리는 이를 환영했지만, 한국이 자체적으로 안전을 제공하는 군부대를 포함한 지방재건팀이어야 함을 우리는 고수해왔습니다. 지방재건팀과 기타 군 자원, 예로 정보, 감시, 정찰 부대의 파견 등은 국회의 승인이 필요해서 어려움이 있겠지만, 이명박 대통령에게 극복하지 못할 정치적인 문제는 아닙니다.

  * 유엔 평화유지군: 국회는 한국군이 입법부의 사전 승인 없이 평화유지군 임무를 위한 파병이 가능하도록 하는 법안을 심사하고 있습니다. 그러는 와중에 국회는 2010년 말까지 한국군의 레바논 평화유지군 파병 연장을 7월에 승인하였습니다. 한국은 2007년 이래로 레바논 평화유지를 위해 367명의 병력을 지원했으며 전 세계적으로 다른 평화유지군 활동에도 여덟 차례 참여하고 있습니다. 2008년 1월 1일 이래로 한국은 국제연합 평화유지군 예산상에 기여한 평가액을 볼 때, 10번째로 큰 공여국입니다.

  * 소말리아 인근 해적소탕: 한국은 소말리아 인근 해역에 해적퇴치 연락그룹의 구성원입니다. 추가로 한국정부는 아덴만에 연합해군 함대의 해상보안 작전의 일환으로 링스 헬리콥터와 고정식 고무보트를 장착한 4,500톤급 구축함을 파견할 계획입니다. 구축함은 310명 인원을 수송할 수 있습니다.

  * 대량살상무기 확산방지구상(이하 PSI) : 북한의 5월 로켓 발사와 핵실험에 대한 대응조치로 한국은 5월 26일 미국이 출범시킨 대량살상무기 확산방지구상에 가입했습니다. 6월에 한국은 폴란드 PSI 회담에 참가했으며, 7월에 서울에서 워크숍을 개최했습니다. 한국정부는 11월에 시드니에서 열릴 차기 워크숍에 참가할 계획이며, 10월 싱가포르 PSI 차단 연습 참가에 흥미를 표했습니다. PSI는 현존하는 국내법과 기존의 국제적 합의를 활용하여 대량 살상무기의 확산을 차단하고 방지를 목표로하는 국제적 공조 노력입니다. 한국정부는 현재 효과적인 PSI 참여를 위한 유관 기관 합동 전략을 마련하고 있습니다.

===== 한미 글로벌 파트너쉽 =====
12. (기밀) 한국은 그 밖의 세계적 현안에서도 더 큰 역할을 수행하길 원하고 있습니다. 아래는 양국의 협조 증대를 위한 좋은 분야입니다.
  * 민주주의와 인권: 한국은 북한의 인권 문제 해결을 위한 새로운 준비태세를 보여주고 있는데, 2008년에 처음으로 연례 국제연합총회 북한 인권결의안을 공동 제안했습니다. 2008년 10월 한국은 미국이 지원하는 민주주의 공동체 협력단체인 아·태 민주주의 협력체의((번역 주: 부시 대통령이 2007년 9월 7일에 중국을 겨냥해서 제안한 뒤로 생긴 모임단체이다. 자세한 내용은 [[http://www.abc.net.au/worldtoday/content/2007/s2026609.html|Bush launches 'democracy partnership]] //The World Today - Friday, 7 September , 2007  12:13:38//)) 첫 번째 고위급 당국자 회의를 주재하기로 합의했습니다.

  * 기후변화: 13번째로 큰 1인당 온실가스 배출국이며, 국내 총생산 면에서 세계에서 15번째 큰 경제국인 한국은 세계 기후 변화 논의에 건설적인 역할을 수행하고 있습니다. 한국정부는 신 재생에너지원에 투자가 온실가스 방출을 줄일 뿐만 아니라 일자리도 창출하고, 경제성장을 촉진하며, 또한 에너지 보안을 강화할 수 있게 한다는 미국의 견해를 공유하고 있습니다. 미국 에너지부는 한국과 다양한 공동 연구개발 활동에 참여하고 있는데, 원자력 에너지와 핵융합, 가스 하이드레이트, “스마트 그리드”, 여타 신재생에너지 기술들을 포함하고 있지만, 양국의 협력을 강화하고 확대할 여지가 있습니다.

  * 개발원조: 한국의 해외 개발원조 사업은 공적개발원조 미화 5억 달러를 비롯해 비슷한 규모의 (중단된) 대북 원조를 포함합니다. 2015년까지 공적개발원조를 3배 늘린다는 게 한국 정부의 목표입니다. 한국은 역내 역할과 기능적 역할이 제한적인 관계로 한국은 공적개발원조에 관한 정책 논의에 수용적이어야만 합니다.

  * 대량살상무기 반확산: 한국정부는 이란정부의 우라늄 농축 활동을 용납할 수 없다고 기회가 될 때마다 이란 상대역에게 말해왔고, 5개 상임이사국 플러스 독일의 일괄 보상책을 지원하였습니다.

===== FTA 및 경제 쟁점 =====
13. 워싱턴 정가에서 한미 FTA를 위한 동력을 생성할 능력의 부재로 인해 이명박 대통령은 그의 반대자들로부터 비난을 받아왔습니다. 4월 이명박과 함께한 G20 회의에서 미국이 FTA를 앞당기는 방안을 찾길 원한다는 오바마 대통령의 성명은 한국정부 내의 불안감이 다소 완화되었고, 이명박이 국회 사법위원회를 통한 한미 FTA 추진을 가능하게 했습니다. 본회의 표결은 아직 잡히지 않았습니다. 반대 목소리가 켜지는 가운데, 여론 조사에서 한미 FTA는 한국민의 60% 지지율을 계속 받고 있으며, 다수당인 한나라당의 강력한 지원을 받고 있어, 워싱턴에서 움직임이 있게 되면 바로 한미 FTA는 본회의에서 통과될 것입니다. 오바마 정부는 철저한 한미 FTA 검토를 실행하고 있으며, 모든 이해당사자가 가진 우려 사항의 정확한 성격을 이해하도록 그들과 긴밀히 협의하고 있으며, 해당 우려를 해결하기 위한 권고 사항을 개발하고 있습니다. 이러한 검토를 지원하고, 동 자유무역협정에 이해관계가 있는 모든 이들이 견해를 충분히 개진하도록 담보하기 위해 우리는 2009년 7월 27일 연방관보 고시를 발행하고 한미 FTA에 관한 의견을 요청했습니다.

14. (기밀) 한국은 미국의 7번째로 큰 무역 상대국이며, 2008년 총 상품교역은 미화 820억 달러가 넘고 있으며, 서비스 부분이 포함된다면 미화 1,000억 달러 이상이 될 것입니다. 미국 국제무역위원회는 2007년 9월에 한미 FTA 결과로 연율 미국 상품 한국 수출이 미화 100~200억 달러로 확대될 것으로 추산했으며, 서비스 부분 또한 확대될 것입니다. 미합중국은 2차 세계대전 이후에 전통적으로 한국의 최대 무역 상대국이였습니다. 아시아에서 중국의 중요성이 커지는 실질적인 징후 중 하나는 중국이 2004년에 한국의 최대 교역 상대국으로 미국을 밀어냈다는 점입니다. 2008년까지 한중 상품교역이 미화 1,680억 달러에 도달했는데, 한미 상품교역 총량의 2배에 달합니다. 북한을 보면 중국이 북한의 총 교역량의 거의 50%에 해당합니다. 한반도 상에 중국의 경제적, 정치적 역할 확대가 한국이 미 합중국과 FTA 협상에 돌입하게 된 가장 중요한 동기 중의 하나입니다. 후속 현 한국 정부는 중국의 커지는 영향에 직면해 미국이 북동아시아에 전폭적으로 참여할 것이라는 징표로써 한미 FTA 비준과 구현을 바라보고 있습니다.

15. (기밀) 한국이 미국과 FTA를 타결짓기 원하는 이유는 한국 경제 개혁가들이 대중국, 대일본 경쟁력 확대를 도모하기 위해 한국경제를 자유화하고 개방할 필요성을 인식하기 때문입니다. 남한은 다수의 FTA를 타결했으며, 2007년 6월 30일 한미 FTA에 서명한 이래로 다른 국가들과 협상을 시작했습니다. 한국은 칠레와 싱가포르, 유럽자유무역연합, 동남아 국가 연합(투자부문은 제외) 등과의 FTA를 구현했습니다. 한국은 인도와 협상을 완료했으며, 보도에 의하면 서명이 임박했습니다. 캐나다, 멕시코, 걸프 협력 회의, 호주, 뉴질랜드, 페루 등과의 협상이 진행 중입니다. 7월에 한국정부는 한·EU FTA를 체결했지만, 아직 동 협정에 서명하지는 않았습니다. 한국 언론은 한·EU FTA의 결과로 한국 내 유럽의 경제적 영향력이 커진다는 소식으로 채워지고 있습니다. 미국 상공회의소 이사회는 한·EU FTA가 한국 내 대유럽 경쟁자들에 맞서는 미국 기업의 경쟁력이 불리할까 우려를 표명했습니다.

16. (기밀) 미국산 쇠고기 시장의 재개방은 FTA와는 별개로 2008년 4월 협정으로 달성되었습니다. 동 쇠고기 협정하의 미국과 한국은 미국산 쇠고기와 쇠고기 상품에 대해 국제 준칙과 과학에 완전히 부합하는 방식으로 한국시장을 재개방하기로 동의했습니다. 2008년 6월 서울에서 대규모 거리 시위 이후에 미국산 쇠고기 수출업자와 한국의 쇠고기 수입업자는 30개월령 미만의 소에서 나온 쇠고기와 쇠고기 상품만을 수출하기로 임시적인 상업조약을 맺었는데, 이는 한국 소비자의 신뢰가 개선될 때까지 일시적인 조치입니다. 쇠고기 판매가 아직 과거의 수준을 회복하지 못했는데, 그 이유는 한국의 통화 환율변동으로 인한 호주산 쇠고기와의 경쟁이 확대, 미국산 쇠고기에 대한 가시지 않는 대중의 우려 등으로 인한 것입니다. 시장이 개방되어 있고 중기적으로 보면 판매가 증가할 것으로 예상합니다. 한국은 미국산 쇠고기에 대해 엄격히 제약하고 있는 다른 국가들과의 협상 진행을 예의 주시하고 있습니다.

17. (기밀) 한국은 세계금융개혁 논의와 관련해 G20 회담 내에서 강력한 협력국가입니다. (한국이 2010년 의장국입니다)한국은 세계 금융제도에 관한 세계적 토론의 장인 G20 회담에 대한 열정이 대단합니다. 한국정부는 한국이 배제하는 논의를 위한 자른 제안을 옹호하는 유럽 국가들에 대해 우려합니다. G20 내부에서 이 대통령은 보호주의를 자제하고, 규제 개선의 필요성과 더불어 강력한 재정적 대응을 요청해왔습니다. 이 대통령은 지금 시점에서 국가 재정부양책을 철회하기에는 시기상조라고 강력히 주장해왔습니다. 한국은 거의 모든 G20 토론마당에서 자국이 미국 측과 같은 대열에 서있다고 보고 있습니다.

18. (기밀) 한국 경제가 개선될 거라는 전망과 불황에서 벗어날 첫 번째 주요 경제국 중의 하나가 한국이라는 전망이 많아지고 있습니다. 2008년 8월 중순 이래로 기준 코스피 주가지수는 8월 초 최고수준에 도달했고, 한국의 통화 원화는 8월 4일 달러당 1,218원으로 마감했는데, 2008년 10월 14일 이래로 최고수준입니다. 분석가 대부분은 앞으로 수개월 추가적인 원화 강세를 전망하고 있습니다. 금융위기가 한국을 강타했던 지난가을만 해도 이런 전망과는 사뭇 달랐습니다. 한국 원화가치가 폭락하고 한국이 금융공황 직전일 듯이 보일 때 즈음인 10월 미국 연방준비 은행이 내놓은 미화 300억 달러 스와프 결정은 최악의 폭풍의 견디어내도록 도와주었고, (미국은) 엄청난 감사 사례를 받았습니다. 나중에 일본, 중국 스와프 메커니즘은 똑같은 영향력을 발휘하지 못했습니다. 2008년 마지막 달에 한국은 수출수요가 급속히 위축되는 경험을 했습니다. 한국정부는 안정 및 경기 부양책은 충격을 완화했고, 원화의 약세로 최근 몇 달간 상당한 경상수지 흑자를 냈습니다. 한국 경제에 구조조정 도전을 맞고 있는 부문은 건설, 조선, 선박, 자동차 등이 해당합니다. GM의 한국 계열사인 GM 대우는 회사 운영상의 구조조정을 위해 막대한 대출을 받기 위해 한국산업은행과 협상 중입니다.
===== 북한 =====
19. (기밀) 오바마 대통령과 이 대통령은 북한의 도발은 대가를 치르게 될 거라는 분명한 메시지를 전달하기로 합의했습니다. 양 정상은 탄도 미사일을 물론이고 북한 핵무기와 현존하는 핵 프로그램의 “완전하고 검증 가능한 폐기”를 달성한다는 다짐을 포함하는 북핵과 미사일 위협을 다루기 위한 원칙에도 합의했습니다. 한국 관리들은 미국의 대북 정책과 관련해 한국과 긴밀히 협의할 것과 북한을 핵보유국으로 인정하지 않겠다는 미국의 보장을 계속 모색하고 있습니다.

20. (기밀) 북한정책은 거의 언제나 남한 의제상에 가장 민감한 정책입니다. 55년간의 한미 동맹에도 한국정부는 여전히 미국 정부의 대북 정책이나 계획 변경으로 뒤통수를 맞거나 소외될까 두려워하고 있습니다. 간단히 말해 모든 미국정부의 대북 움직임에 대해 한국정부가 인지하고, 상의하고 있다고 남한 국민에게 보여져야만 합니다. 한국 관리들은 한미 양국 정부가 북한정책을 형성하고 구현하는 동반자로 보고 있으며, 북한이 양국 사이를 갈라놓도록 미국정부가 용인하지 않겠다는 확약을 일관되게 모색하고 있습니다.

21. (기밀) 남북관계가 조기에 개선될 기회는 사실상 없습니다; 이 대통령은 원칙을 고수하며, 남북 관계에서 더 많은 상호주의를 고집하고 있고, 김정일은 북한 내부 상황을 이유로 이에 굴복하지 않을 것입니다. 중요한 점은 남한사람들이 북한의 계속되는 협박조의 수사에 대해 아주 지겨워하지만, 크게 신경 쓰지 않는 것처럼 보입니다. 그런 관계로 한국 정부의 대북 기조에 대해 대체로 불편해하지 않는 듯 보입니다. 서해 상의 긴장 고조와 미사일 발사는 예상보다는 적은 대중적 불안감이 조성됐습니다. 한국 정부는 6자회담 복귀 요청과 더불어 냉정하고 확고한 대북 공동 전선을 당신에게 제시할 기회를 환영할 것입니다.

22. (민감하지만 미분류) 개성산업공단은 남한과 북한 사이에 유일하게 남아있는 합작 경제사업입니다. (다른 합작사업인 금강산 관광은 북한 보안 병력의 총력으로 남한 관광객이 사망한 이후 2008년 7월 11일 폐쇄됐습니다.) 비무장지대 북방 6마일 북한에 위치한 개성산업공단은 북한노동자 대략 4만 명을 (84%가 20~39세 여성) 고용하고 있는 한국 소유의 106개 공장의 주소지입니다. 지난 2008년 이래로, 개성산업공단과 관련해 남북한 긴장은 증가했습니다. 북한은 여러 차례 임시로 국경을 차단했고, 개성산업공단에 출입이 허용되는 남한 직원의 수를 제한했습니다. 북한은 북한 근로자에 대한 임금 대폭 인상과 (월급을 미화 55달러에서 미화 300달러로 상향) 기숙사 추가 건설, 미화 5억 달러의 추가 토지 임대료를 요구하고 있습니다.

23. (민감하지만 미분류) 북한은 개성산업공단에서 근무 중인 현대 아산 직원 한 명이 북한을 비방하고 북한 여성 근로자를 매수하려 혐의로 그를 억류시켰습니다. 한국 시민의 억류 해제를 담보에 더해 개성산업공단에서 남한의 우선 과제는 고용자들의 안전과 자유로운 국경 통행과 접근성, 개성 외곽 지역 출신 북한 근로자의 수를 늘리는 데 있습니다. 비록 개성공단 소재 남한 기업들이 현재의 긴장조성에 대해 걱정하고, 금전적 손실에 대해 불평하고 있지만, 현재까지 단지 한 기업만이 개성산업공단을 철수했습니다.

24. (민감하지만 미분류) 북한과 남한은 2009년 4월과 7월 사이에 네 차례 협상을 개최했지만, 돌파구를 마련하지 못했습니다. 가장 최근 협상은 7월 2일에 있었습니다. 양측은 개성산업공단 지속을 다짐하는 듯 보입니다. 미합중국은 남북대화를 일관되게 지지해왔으며, 양측이 개성산업공단을 둘러싼 분쟁 해결을 희망한다고 표명했습니다.
===== 비자면제프로그램과 웨스트 프로그램 =====
25. (미분류) 한국정부는 2008년 10월 비자면제프로그램에 가입되었습니다. 이번 조치는 양국 사이 이동을 촉진하고, 대민 유대관계를 개선하는 하나의 성공 사례였습니다. 7월 초 이래로 대략 20만 명의 한국인이 전자여행허가제를 이용한 비자 면제 승인 신청을 했습니다. 전자여행허가제 신청자 99% 이상 승인되었고, 우리는 전자여행허가제 활용의 상승추세가 계속될 것으로 예상하고 있습니다.

26. (미분류) 2009년 3월에 출범한 웨스트 (취업, 영어연수 및 여행) 프로그램은((번역 주: 자세한 내용은 [[http://korean.seoul.usembassy.gov/visas_visa_waiver_program.html| 참조 링크를 확인하세요]])) 자격을 갖춘 대학생들과 최근 졸업생들이 영어연수, 전문가 수준의 인턴쉽 참여, 개별적 여행을 할 수 있도록 문화교류 비자(J-1)에 근거해 최장 18개월 이상 미국에 입국할 수 있도록 해줍니다. <wrap hi>웨스트 프로그램에 근거해 한국 학생 185명이 이미 단체로 미국 여행길에 올랐으며, 2기 159명의 참여자가 출국을 준비하고 있습니다.</wrap> 2008년 12월 이래로 11만 명의 남한 학생이 미국 유학 중이며, 초등학교에서 대학교까지 망라되어 있습니다. 한국의 교육과학기술부 2007년 자료에 의하면, 국외 유학을 선택한 대학원생의 27%가 미국 유학을 택한 것으로 나옵니다.<WRAP center round help 90%>//**보도에는 누락된 1기 3명과 2기 1명은 어느 대가집 자제분? 구린 내가 진동한다**//[[http://www.ohmynews.com/nws_web/view/at_pg.aspx?CNTN_CD=A0001334382|한미정상회담이 만든 '미국 인턴제' 꽝이네]] //오마이뉴스// 기사에 의하면 웨스트 프로그램 1기는 182명, 2기는 158명으로 나오는데, 미 대사는 1기 참여자의 숫자가 3명이 많은 185명이고, 2기는 1명이 많은 159명이라고 증언하고 있다. 추가된 1기 3명과 2기 1명은 어느 대가집 자제분인지 궁금하다. 기자들은 신속히 조사바란다.</WRAP>
===== 핵심 =====
27. (기밀) 남한은 생각이 비슷하고, 열의가 넘치는 준비된 동반자로 더욱 폭넓고 깊이 있는 미합중국과 동맹관계를 갖길 원하고 있습니다. 한국사람들은 방위조약을 훨씬 뛰어넘는 한미동맹을 바라고 있습니다. 맞습니다. 한국인들은 더 많은 발언권과 한층 대등한 관계를 원하고 있지만, 이는 그들의 동기에 단지 일부분입니다. 오히려 한국인들은 미국과의 유대관계가 그 어느 때보다도 더 깊어지길 기대합니다; 예를 들면 이백만 한국계 미국인 공동체, 엄청난 수의 한국인 미국 유학생 등이 그 증인입니다. 그러나 무엇보다도 상당수의 남한사람은 한국과 미국이 가치와 전략적 이해관계를 공유한다고 확신합니다. 한반도 상에 한미 협력이 심화하고 있는 마당에 지금이 한미관계를 글로벌 파트너쉽이라는 새로운 지평으로 격상시킬 적기입니다.
===== 당신의 회동일정 =====
28. (기밀) 당신은 회동 일정은 이명박 대통령, 김성환 외교안보수석, 유명환 외교통상부 장관, 김종훈 통상교섭본부장, 김형오 국회의장, 박진 외교통상통일위원회 위원장 등과 함께하기로 잡혀 있습니다. 가능성 있는 논의 주제는:
  * 북한: 당신의 대화 상대역들은 미국의 대북 정책과 관련해 한국과 긴밀히 협의할 것과 북한을 핵보유국으로 인정하지 않겠다는 미국의 보장을 계속 모색하고 있습니다.

  * 한미동맹: 당신의 대화 상대역들은 한반도 수호에 대한 미국의 헌신이 중요함을 강조할 수 있습니다.

  * 글로벌 파트너쉽: 당신의 대화 상대역들은 중대 국가인 아프간과 파키스탄의 안정과 재건 노력; 레바논 한국 평화유지군; 그리고 소말리아 인근 해역 해적소탕 노력 등에 대한 당신이 판단하는 한국의 지원 수준을 가늠해 볼 수도 있습니다.

  * FTA: 당신의 대화 상대역들은 미 의회의 한미 FTA 승인 전망에 대한 당신의 견해를 타진할 것입니다. 통상교섭본부장은 한미 FTA는 미국과 한국의 균형 잡인 이해관계를 대변하며, 한국정부가 FTA 협정문을 재협상할 수 없음을 강조할 것입니다.
스티븐스
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/17/09seoul1241|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 참조 링크 =====
  - [[http://korean.seoul.usembassy.gov/visas_visa_waiver_program.html|비자면제 프로그램]] //주한 미국대사관//
  - [[http://www.ohmynews.com/NWS_Web/Articleview/article_print.aspx?cntn_cd=A0001334382|한미정상회담이 만든 '미국 인턴제' 꽝이네]] //오마이뉴스//
  - [[http://www.abc.net.au/worldtoday/content/2007/s2026609.html|Bush launches 'democracy partnership]] //The World Today - Friday, 7 September , 2007  12:13:38//
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1241.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 001241 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2019 
TAGS: PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs], PREL [External Political Relations],
KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)] 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR CODEL BERMAN'S VISIT TO KOREA 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Mark A. Tokola. 
Reasons 1.4 (b), 
 (d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  CODEL Berman, welcome to Korea.  The 
alliance between the U.S. and the Republic of Korea (ROK) is 
strong, enduring, and strategically important.  Your visit 
follows the successful June 16 U.S.-ROK Presidential Summit 
and adoption of the Joint Vision Statement.  The Joint Vision 
Statement was well-received here, both for its recommitment 
to a continued strengthening of our security relationship 
(including its affirmation of the U.S. nuclear umbrella and 
extended deterrence to the ROK), and for outlining what a 
21st century U.S.-ROK relationship entails.  To realize this 
vision, we will need to continue to expand our cooperation, 
both regionally and globally.  Security in the region, 
particularly in view of North Korea,s continued belligerent 
posture and Kim Jong-Il,s declining health, is important to 
Korean officials.  Like us, the ROK supports the Six Party 
Talks and remains adamant that we should not recognize North 
Korea as a nuclear state.  Your South Korean interlocutors 
are very interested in how you view the proposed North Korean 
contingency plan, and prospects for denuclearizing North 
Korea. 
 
¶2. (C) President Lee has faced criticism from his opponents 
for his inability to generate momentum for the Korea-U.S. 
(KORUS) FTA in Washington.  Ratification of the FTA is seen 
as a sign of America's strategic commitment in northeast 
Asia.  President Obama's statement at the April G20 meeting 
with Lee, that the U.S. wanted to find a way forward on the 
KORUS FTA, allayed some of the anxiety in Seoul, and enabled 
Lee to push the FTA through the committee of jurisdiction in 
Korea,s National Assembly in late April.  A full plenary 
vote in the National Assembly has not been scheduled; while 
opponents are vocal, the KORUS FTA continues to receive about 
a 60 percent approval Korean public opinion polls, is 
strongly supported by the majority GNP party, and is expected 
to pass once there is some sign of movement in Washington. 
The Obama Administration is conducting a thorough review of 
the KORUS FTA and consulting closely with all stakeholders to 
understand the exact nature of their concerns, and to develop 
recommendations for addressing them.  To assist with this 
review, and to ensure that all who may have an interest in 
this free trade agreement are able to fully express their 
views, we issued a Federal Register Notice on July 27, 2009, 
requesting comments on the KORUS FTA.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶3. (C) The ROK, with its vibrant democracy, free market, 
high-tech economy, highly educated population, free press, 
and ever-deepening people-to-people ties with the United 
States, is a striking success story, including for U.S. 
foreign policy.  Our intensive engagement with the ROK since 
its founding in 1948 exemplifies the importance of all three 
pillars Secretary Clinton has outlined describing U.S. 
foreign policy:  defense, diplomacy, and development.  South 
Korea's success is based on a shared commitment to defense, 
as shown by the 28,500 U.S. troops still on the Peninsula, 
the substantial development assistance the U.S. provided 
after the Korean War, and our close diplomatic cooperation to 
achieve a denuclearized North Korea and a more secure and 
prosperous future for the region. 
 
¶4. (C) Now a developed country with a tested democratic 
system, South Korea increasingly has the capability as well 
as the political will to assume larger regional and global 
roles.  Your visit will encourage your interlocutors to 
become even more active partners with us on issues ranging 
from human rights promotion to climate change to sea piracy 
to counter-terrorism.  We share values and strategic goals 
with this highly capable ally; we need to give substance to 
our shared aspiration to upgrade our bilateral relationship, 
making it a global partnership. 
 
---------------------- 
The Domestic Situation 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) President Lee, of the center-right Grand National 
Party (GNP), began his single five-year term in February 
2008, ending ten years of center-left control of the 
Presidency.  In April 2008 the GNP won a solid majority over 
the main opposition Democratic Party (DP) in the unicameral 
National Assembly.  The GNP's success at the polls, however, 
belied the lack of consensus among the South Korean public on 
domestic political issues like media law reform, labor relations, 
tax policy, and education.  President Lee has 
struggled with low approval ratings -- about 30 percent -- 
since taking office, especially following his decision to 
re-open the Korean market to U.S. beef last year.  In the 
National Assembly, the GNP and DP have even lower approval 
ratings than President Lee, resulting in a virtually 
deadlocked domestic agenda. 
 
¶6. (C) President Lee has remained publicly disengaged from 
the squabbling in the National Assembly and is focusing 
instead on foreign policy, resource diplomacy, and 
international cooperative efforts on green growth, climate 
change, and overcoming the economic crisis.  He campaigned on 
a pledge to strengthen the U.S.-ROK alliance, and is widely 
seen as having been successful.  With China and Russia, he 
has substantially expanded the ROK's economic and political 
ties.  He has attempted to overcome historical animosities 
with Japan to advance Korea-Japan ties based on Korea's 
pragmatic interests, but sensitivities to Japan's 
colonization of Korea run deep.  Looking wider, President Lee 
is actively cultivating new ties with Southeast Asia, Central 
Asia, and Europe. 
 
¶7. (C) Former President Kim Dae-jung's health has been 
failing and he is currently hospitalized in Seoul in 
intensive care.  The prognosis for President Kim, who was in 
office 1998-2003 and who is 84, is not good. 
 
------------ 
The Alliance 
------------ 
 
¶8. (C) For over half a century the U.S.-ROK alliance has 
provided the foundation for peace and prosperity in Northeast 
Asia.  The ROK has benefitted greatly; neither the economic 
"Miracle on the Han" nor Korea,s democratic flowering would 
have been possible absent a U.S. defense shield and economic 
assistance and support.  The U.S. too has benefited.  USFK 
(U.S. Forces in Korea) is our only troop presence in mainland 
East Asia, and South Korea contributes billions of dollars to 
USFK operating expenses. 
 
¶9. (C) The Summit Joint Vision Statement offers a compelling 
vision of expanding the role of the U.S.-ROK alliance 
regionally and globally.  On the Korean Peninsula, we are 
also working to strengthen, further broaden, and 
appropriately evolve the security relationship by 
implementing three key bilateral transformation agreements 
known as YRP, LPP and STP. 
 
-- YRP:  The Yongsan Relocation Plan will relocate the 
headquarters of U.S. Forces (USFK) from the middle of Seoul 
to a new, purpose-built war-fighting headquarters south of 
the city, thereby giving back to the Koreans a large tract of 
land historically associated with Japanese occupation which 
they plan to turn into a central park.  Progress on the 
implementation of YRP continues but construction to prepare 
U.S. Army Garrison ) Humphreys, the hub for the relocation, 
continues on schedule but faces obstacles that require 
President Lee,s and his administration,s support if we are 
to meet the agreed 2014 completion date. 
 
-- LPP:  The Land Partnership Plan will consolidate over 100 
U.S. military bases spread all across Korea into two key 
strategic hubs south of the Han River, replacing an outdated 
military footprint from the end of the Korean War with a 
modern and better-positioned force posture.  The ROK Ministry 
of National Defense (MND) seeks to complete the LPP by the 
end of 2015. 
 
-- STP: The Strategic Transition Plan is the process under 
which we are transferring wartime operational control (OPCON) 
of South Korean forces from the U.S. military to the ROK 
military by April 17, 2012.  President Lee has emphasized the 
need to keep the spotlight off of wartime OPCON transition 
due to increased scrutiny by ROK domestic opposition groups 
regarding the April 17, 2012 transition date (in the wake of 
North Korea,s recent claimed nuclear test).  We are 
continuing to emphasize the process for close cooperation in 
reviewing OPCON transition progress through the SCM and 
management of messaging and public perceptions to highlight 
the value of the restructuring. 
 
¶10. (C) We must continue to emphasize the importance of 
completing the two relocation elements of USFK 
transformation, YRP and LPP.  Those agreements, signed in 
2004, did not come with appropriated funds.  The Master Plan, 
finished in 2007, lays out the cost and timeline but the ROKG 
has yet to request funding from the National Assembly.  Other 
U.S. and ROK private sector initiatives are failing to fill 
the funding gap.  As a result, alliance transformation, which 
was originally scheduled for completion in 2008, is facing a 
delay of many more years.  To avoid further delays, the ROKG 
must make implementation of these moves a priority.  For our 
part, we must be clear and consistent in identifying our own 
top priorities . 
 
¶11. (C).  The time is right to expand the areas in which the 
U.S. and the ROK cooperate on global security issues.  You 
may want to raise the following areas where the ROK may be 
ready to increase its global security role: 
 
-- Afghanistan:  The ROKG is planning to provide more 
assistance and training in Afghanistan, including building a 
new hospital and a training center in Bagram, and 
contributing ambulances, motorcycles, and police trainers. 
However, we need a lot more from the ROK, especially 
financial support for the Afghan Army, for which we have 
requested USD 100 million a year for five years, which is the 
USG primary request of the ROK.  The ROKG also is considering 
sending a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) to 
Afghanistan, which we would welcome, but we also have 
insisted that any such PRT include a military unit to provide 
for its own security.  Such a deployment (the PRT as well as 
any other military assets, such as an ISR unit ) 
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) will need 
National Assembly approval, which will pose difficult, but 
not insurmountable, political problems for President Lee. 
 
-- UN Peacekeeping Operations:  The National Assembly is 
deliberating on a bill that will allow the ROK military to be 
deployed for peacekeeping missions without prior legislative 
approval.  In the meantime, the National Assembly in July 
approved extending the ROK,s PKO deployment in Lebanon until 
the end of December 2010.  The ROK has contributed 367 
soldiers for peacekeeping in Lebanon since 2007 and is 
participating in eight other PKO operations around the world. 
 As of January 1, 2008 the ROK was the 10th largest provider 
of assessed contributions to the UN PKO budget. 
 
-- Combating Piracy off Somalia:  The ROK is a member of the 
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. 
Additionally, the ROKG deployed a 4,500 ton class destroyer 
equipped with a Lynx helicopter and rigid inflatable craft to 
the Gulf of Aden to be part of the maritime security 
operations of the combined maritime forces.  The destroyer 
carries up to 310 personnel. 
 
-- Proliferation Security Initiative:  In response to the 
DPRK,s May rocket launch and nuclear test, the ROK on May 26 
joined the U.S.-initiated Proliferation Security Initiative 
(PSI).   In June the ROK participated in a PSI meeting in 
Poland, and held a workshop in Seoul in July.  The ROKG plans 
to attend the next workshop in Sydney in September, and has 
expressed interest in attending the interdiction exercises in 
Singapore in October.  PSI is an international, interagency 
effort aimed at preventing or interdicting the proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction using existing domestic laws 
and established international agreements.  The ROKG currently 
is formulating an interagency strategy for its effective PSI 
participation. 
 
--------------------------- 
U.S.-ROK Global Partnership 
--------------------------- 
 
¶12. (C) The ROK also wants to play a bigger role on other 
global issues and the following are good areas for increased 
cooperation: 
 
-- Democracy and Human Rights: The ROK has demonstrated a new 
readiness to address human rights concerns in the DPRK, 
co-sponsoring the annual UNGA North Korea human rights 
resolution in 2008 for the first time.  In October 2008 the 
ROK agreed to chair the first Senior Officials' Meeting of 
the Asia-Pacific Democracy Partnership, a U.S.-supported 
regional subset of the Community of Democracies. 
 
-- Climate Change:  Korea, the 13th largest per capita 
emitter of greenhouse gases and the world,s 15th largest 
economy in terms of GDP, is playing a constructive role in 
discussions on global climate change.  The ROKG shares the 
U.S. view that that investment in new and renewable energy 
sources not only can reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but 
also can create jobs, spur economic growth, and enhance 
energy security. The U.S. Department of Energy is engaged in 
a variety of collaborative R&D activities with Korea, 
including in nuclear energy, fusion, gas hydrates, 
"smart grids," and other new and renewable energy technologies, but 
there is room to expand and strengthen our cooperation. 
 
-- Development Assistance:  Korea's overseas development 
assistance program currently includes nearly USD 500 million 
in Official Development Assistance (ODA), as well as a 
roughly similar figure for North Korea (suspended).  The ROKG 
target is to triple ODA (as a percentage of GDP) by 2015. 
With limited functional and regional capacity, Korea should 
be receptive to policy discussions on ODA coordination. 
 
-- Counter-Proliferation:  The ROKG has told Iranian 
counterparts at every opportunity that Tehran's uranium 
enrichment activities are unacceptable and has supported the 
P5-plus-1 incentives package. 
 
----------------------- 
FTA and Economic Issues 
----------------------- 
 
¶13. (C) President Lee has faced criticism from his opponents 
for his inability to generate momentum for the Korea-U.S. 
(KORUS) FTA in Washington.  President Obama's statement at 
the April G20 meeting with Lee, that the U.S. wanted to find 
a way forward on the KORUS FTA, allayed some of the anxiety 
in Seoul, and enabled Lee to push the FTA through the 
committee of jurisdiction in Korea,s National Assembly in 
late April.  A full plenary vote in the National Assembly has 
not been scheduled; while opponents are vocal, the KORUS FTA 
continues to receive about a 60 percent approval Korean 
public opinion polls, is strongly supported by the majority 
GNP party, and is expected to pass once there is some sign of 
movement in Washington.  The Obama Administration is 
conducting a thorough review of the KORUS FTA and consulting 
closely with all stakeholders to understand the exact nature 
of their concerns, to develop recommendations for addressing 
them.  To assist with this review, and to ensure that all who 
may have an interest in this free trade agreement are able to 
fully express their views, we issued a Federal Register 
Notice on July 27, 2009, requesting comments on the KORUS FTA. 
 
¶14. (C) Korea is our seventh largest trading partner, with 
total merchandise trade in 2008 of over USD 82 billion (and 
more than USD 100 billion if services are included).  The 
U.S. International Trade Commission estimated in September 
2007 that U.S. merchandise exports to Korea would expand by 
USD 10-12 billion on an annual basis as a result of the FTA 
and that services exports would also expand.  The United 
States has traditionally been the ROK's biggest trading 
partner in the post-WWII era.  One tangible sign of China's 
growing importance in Asia and in Korea, however, is that 
China displaced the United States as Korea's top trading 
partner in 2004.  By 2008, China-ROK merchandise trade 
reached USD 168 billion, doubling the U.S.-ROK total.  With 
respect to North Korea, China accounts for nearly 50 percent 
of that country's total trade.  The growing economic and 
political role of China on the Korean peninsula is one of the 
most important motivations for Korea to enter into FTA 
negotiations with the United States.  Successive ROK 
Governments have seen the ratification and implementation of 
the KORUS FTA as symbolic of the U.S. will to remain fully 
engaged in Northeast Asia in the face of increasing Chinese 
influence. 
 
¶15. (C) Korea also wants to conclude an FTA with the United 
States because Korean economic reformers recognize that the 
Korean economy needs to liberalize and open in order to 
promote greater competitiveness vis--vis China and Japan. 
South Korea has concluded a number of FTAs and launched 
negotiations on others since the signing of the KORUS FTA 
negotiations on June 30, 2007.  The ROK has implemented FTAs 
with Chile, Singapore, EFTA, and ASEAN (except investment). 
The ROK has concluded negotiations with India and signing is 
reportedly imminent.  Negotiations are underway with Canada, 
Mexico, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Australia, New Zealand, 
and Peru.  In July, the ROKG announced that negotiations on 
the EU-Korea FTA were concluded (but the agreement is not yet 
signed).  ROK media have been filled with stories of the 
increasing economic weight of Europe in Korea as a result of 
the FTA.  The Board of Governors of the American Chamber of 
Commerce has expressed concern that the EU-Korea FTA will 
disadvantage the competitiveness of U.S. firms vis--vis 
their European competitors in Korea. 
 
¶16. (C) The reopening of the beef market was accomplished in 
an April 2008 agreement separate from the FTA.  Under this 
agreement, the United States and Korea agreed to reopen 
Korea,s market to U.S. beef and beef products in a manner 
fully consistent with international standards and science. 
In June 2008, following massive street protests in Seoul, 
U.S. beef exporters and Korean beef importers reached a 
temporary commercial agreement to only export beef and beef 
products from cattle under 30 months of age, as a 
transitional measure, until Korean consumer confidence 
improves.  While beef sales have not yet returned to past 
levels due to Korea,s currency exchange fluctuations, 
increased competition from Australian beef, and lingering 
public concerns about the safety of U.S. beef, the market is 
open and we expect increased sales over the medium term. 
Korea is also watching closely our ongoing negotiations with 
other countries that have stricter restrictions on U.S. beef. 
 
¶17. (C) On the global financial reform discussions, Korea is 
a strong ally in the G-20 process (which it will chair in 
2010).  Korea is enthusiastic about the G20 as the global 
forum for action on the global financial system.  The ROKG is 
concerned that European countries are advocating other 
formulas for such discussions that would exclude Korea. 
Within the G20, President Lee has called for a strong fiscal 
response and refraining from protectionism as well as 
necessary regulatory improvements.  President Lee Myung-bak 
has strongly argued that it would be premature to withdraw 
the national fiscal stimulus packages at this juncture. 
Korea sees itself as lining up on the U.S. side on almost all 
G20 debates. 
 
¶18. (C) The Korean economy is looking better and is 
increasingly forecast to be one of the first major economies 
to emerge from recession.  The benchmark KOSPI stock index in 
early August reached the highest level since mid-August 2008 
and the won, the Korean currency, closed at 1218 per dollar 
on August 4, the strongest level since October 14, 2008. 
Most analysts foresee further strengthening of the won in the 
months ahead.  The picture looked far different last fall, 
when the financial crisis hit Korea hard.  A USD 30 billion 
swap line extended by the U.S. Federal Reserve in October, as 
the Korean won was plummeting and Korea looked to be on the 
brink of a financial panic, helped Korea weather the worst of 
the storm, and gained tremendous gratitude.  The later 
Japanese and Chinese swap mechanisms did not have the same 
impact.  In the closing months of 2008 Korea experienced 
dramatic contraction of demand for its exports.  The ROKG's 
stabilization and stimulus packages mitigated the impact and 
the weakened currency has generated a significant current 
account surplus in recent months.  Sectors of the Korean 
economy facing restructuring challenges include construction, 
shipbuilding, shipping and automotive.  GM Daewoo, GM,s 
Korean subsidiary, is negotiating with the Korea Development 
Bank for a sizeable loanto restructure its operations. 
 
----------- 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
¶19. (C) Presidents Obama and Lee agreed to send a clear 
message to North Korea that its provocations come at a price. 
 They also agreed on principles to deal with North Korea's 
nuclear and missile threats, including commitments to 
achieving the "complete and verifiable elimination" of North 
Korea's nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs as well 
as the ballistic missile program.  Korean officials continue 
to seek assurances that the United States will consult 
closely with the ROK on its North Korea policy and that the 
United States will not recognize North Korea as a nuclear 
state. 
 
¶20. (C) North Korea policy is almost always the most 
sensitive issue on the South Korean agenda.  Fifty-five years 
of alliance notwithstanding, the ROKG still fears being left 
out or surprised by Washington's initiatives or policy 
changes on North Korea.  Simply put, the ROKG must be seen by 
South Koreans as being informed and consulted on all USG 
moves on North Korea.  Korean officials see Washington and 
Seoul as partners in forming and implementing policies toward 
the North and consistently seek affirmation that Washington 
will not allow Pyongyang to drive a wedge between us. 
 
¶21. (C) There is virtually no chance of early improvement in 
South-North relations; President Lee is determined to stick 
to principle and to insist on a more reciprocal relationship 
with the North, and Kim Jong-il will not give in for his own 
domestic reasons.  Importantly, South Koreans appear tired 
of, but not particularly bothered by, the continuing 
threatening rhetoric from the North, and therefore seem 
largely comfortable with their government's stance. 
Heightening tensions in the West Sea and missile launches 
have created less public anxiety than might be expected.  The 
ROKG will welcome the opportunity to present with you a 
united front of calm and determination toward the North, 
combined with a call to return to the Six- Party Talks. 
 
¶22. (SBU) The Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC) is the only 
remaining joint economic project between North and South 
Korea.   (The other joint venture, Mt. Kumkang tours, was 
closed on July 11, 2008, after North Korean security forces 
shot a South Korean tourist to death.)  Located in North 
Korea, six miles north of the DMZ, the KIC opened in December 
2004 and is home to 106 ROK-owned factories employing 
approximately 40,000 North Korean workers (84 percent are 
women age 20-39).  Since late 2008, North-South tensions 
regarding the KIC have increased.  The DPRK closed the border 
temporarily on multiple occasions, and has placed limits on 
the number of South Korean employees allowed in the KIC.  The 
DPRK is demanding drastically higher wages for employees (up 
from USD 55 to USD 300 per month), construction of additional 
dormitories and an additional fee of USD 500 million for land 
usage. 
 
¶23. (SBU) North Koreans detained a South Korean Hyundai Asan 
employee working at KIC on March 30, accusing him of defaming 
North Korea and attempting to suborn a North Korean female 
worker.  In addition to securing the release of the ROK 
citizen, South Korea's priorities at the KIC include 
guaranteeing employee safety, freedom of access and 
border-crossing, and increasing the number of North Korean 
workers brought in from outside the Kaesong area.  Although 
the South Korean firms at KIC are concerned about the current 
tension and complain of financial losses, only one company 
has withdrawn from KIC to date. 
 
¶24. (SBU) The DPRK and the ROK have held four rounds of 
negotiations between April and July 2009 without any 
breakthrough, with the most recent session taking place on 
July 2.  Both sides appear to be committed to continuing KIC 
operations.  The United States has consistently supported 
North-South dialogue and expressed hope that the two sides 
will resolve their disputes over the KIC. 
 
-------- 
VWP/WEST 
-------- 
 
¶25. (U)  The ROK was included in the the Visa Waiver Program 
(VWP) in October 2008. This step has been a success in 
facilitating travel and improving people-to-people ties 
between nations.  As of the beginning of July, approximately 
200,000 Koreans had applied for VWP approval using the ESTA 
(Electronic Approval for Travel Authorization).  More than 99 
percent of the ESTA applications have been approved and we 
continue to see an upward trend in ESTA usage. 
 
¶26. (U)  The WEST (Work, English Study, and Travel) program, 
inaugurated in March 2009, allows qualifying college students 
and recent graduates to enter the U.S. for up to 18 months on 
J-1 exchange visitor visas that allow them to study English, 
participate in professional-level internships and travel 
independently.  A group of 185 Korean students have already 
travelled to the U.S. on the WEST program and a second wave 
of 159 is preparing to depart.  As of December 2008, there 
were 110,000 South Koreans studying in the U.S. at all 
levels, from elementary to graduate school.  According to 
Korean Ministry of Education data for 2007, 27% of all 
post-graduate students choosing to study abroad chose to 
study in the U.S. 
 
--------------- 
The Bottom Line 
--------------- 
 
¶27. (C) South Korea is a like-minded, energetic partner that 
is ready, prepared, and wants to have a broader and deeper 
alliance with the United States.  Koreans would like the 
alliance to be a lot more than a security arrangement.  Yes, 
they want more say, even a more equal relationship, but this 
is only part of their motivation.  Rather, they see that 
their ties with the U.S. are deeper now than ever; witness, 
for example, the two million-strong Korean American 
community, and the enormous numbers of Koreans studying in 
the United States.  Above all, however, a very large majority 
of South Koreans are convinced that the ROK and the United 
States have shared values and shared strategic interests. 
It's time to take the relationship to a new level of global 
partnership, even as we deepen our cooperation on the Korean 
peninsula. 
 
------------- 
Your Meetings 
------------- 
 
¶28. (C) You are scheduled to meet with President Lee 
Myung-bak, National security Advisor Kim Sung-hwan, Foreign 
Minister Yu Myung-hwan, Trade Minister Kim Jong-hoon, Speaker 
of the National Assembly Kim Hyong-o, and Chairman of the 
National Assembly Foreign Affairs, Trade and Unification 
Committee Park Jin.  Likely topics of discussion include: 
 
-- North Korea: Your interlocutors may seek assurances that 
the U.S. will consult closely with the ROK on its North Korea 
policy and that the U.S. will not recognize North Korea as a 
nuclear state. 
 
-- U.S.-ROK Alliance: Your interlocutors may stress the 
importance of the U.S. commitment to the defense of the 
Korean peninsula. 
 
-- Global Partnership: Your interlocutors may gauge your 
level of interest in ROK contributions to reconstruction and 
stabilization of vital countries such as Afghanistan and 
Pakistan; ROK peacekeeping in Lebanon; and anti-piracy 
efforts off the coast of Somalia. 
 
-- FTA: Your interlocutors will seek your views on the 
prospects for Congressional approval of the agreement.  The 
Trade Minister will stress that the FTA represents a balance 
of American and Korean interests and that the ROKG cannot 
re-negotiate the text of the FTA. 
STEPHENS
</file>