^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1723  |  2009-10-29  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 29일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001723

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=83838|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 29일]]
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/26 20:29//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 동아일보
민주 3·한나라 2;한나라, 재보선서 수도권·충청 완패 민주당, 세종시·4대강 대공세 예고 

중앙일보, 한국일보, 한겨레신문, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
10·28 재보선/ 與정국 주도권 약화… 세종시 수정·4대강 사업 등 '먹구름'

===== 국내 동향 =====

12명의 한국인 미국 유학생이 학업을 중단하고 귀국했다. 유학생들이 머물던 기숙사 주인이 보호 중이던 학생 중 한 명을 폭행한 혐의로 10월 22일 지역 경찰에 체포되었기 때문이다. (중앙)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

리근 북한 외무성 미국국장과 성김 미국 6자회담 수석대표는 토론회에서 북핵 문제를 포함한 동북아 안보 문제에 대해 의견을 교환했으나 관심을 모은 북미 양자회담을 위한 접촉은 없었던 것으로 전해졌다. (한국일보)

파키스탄 북서부에 위치한 번잡한 시장에서 대규모 폭탄이 장착된 자동차가 폭발해 거의 100명이 사망했다. 이번 폭발은 힐러리 클린턴 국무부 장관이 회담 참석차 파키스탄을 방문한 지 불과 3시간만에 발생했다. (전체)

같은 날 아프가니스탄에서는 탈레반 무장 괴한이 유엔 직원이 사용하는 게스트 하우스를 공격해 유엔 직원 6명을 비롯해 12명이 사망하였다. (전체)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

중도 한국일보는 리근 북한 외무성 미국국장과 성김 미국 6자회담 수석대표는 토론회에서 북핵 문제를 포함한 동북아 안보 문제에 대해 의견을 교환했으나 관심을 모은 북미 양자회담을 위한 접촉은 없었던 것으로 전해졌다고 워싱턴발 기사를 내부 지면에 실었다.

소식통들은 리 국장이 그 밖에도 전미외교정책협의회(NCAFP)와 코리아소사이어티가 주최하는 북미 간 외교ㆍ안보 토론회에 참석하기 위해 뉴욕에 6일 간 체류하는 만큼 최소 한두차례 북미 간 만남이 성사될 것으로 예상하고 있다.

==== 아프간 원조 ====

중도 우파 중앙일보는 <아프간 수렁에 빠질 각오 돼 있나>란 제하의 사설을 게재하였다. 사설은 "지금 아프간 상황에서 전투병과 비전투병의 구분은 사실상 무의미하다. 안전지대가 없다고 봐야 한다. …앞으로 아프간전을 어떻게 끌고 갈 것인지 미국 자신도 아직 결정하지 못했다. …이런 판에 우리가 먼저 나서서 재파병 결정을 내릴 이유는 없는 것이다. 다음 달 7일 실시될 아프간 대선 결선투표 결과와 미국의 최종 선택까지 다 지켜본 뒤 결정해도 늦지 않다."

==== 파키스탄과 아프가니스탄에서 발생한 테러 공격 ====

모든 신문은 아프간·파키스탄 국경 양쪽에서 발생한 28일 테러 공격을 국제면에서 주로 다뤘다. 파키스탄에서 발생한 잔인한 폭탄 공격은 힐러리 클린턴 국무부 장관이 회담 참석차 파키스탄에 도착한지 불과 3시간만에 발생했다고 언론은 보도했다.

보수 조선일보의 기사 제목: <파키스탄·아프간 탈레반 총반격… 美軍 '잔인한 10월'> 중도우파 중앙일보의 제목: <탈레반, 유엔숙소 테러 … “아프간 결선투표 방해”>

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://shindonga.donga.com/3/all/13/108037/1|오바마와 한미 FTA]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 29일)

방형남 논설위원

올해 버락 오바마 미국 대통령은 한미 자유무역협정(FTA)에 관해 다음과 같은 어록을 남겼다. “한미 FTA에 대해 이명박 대통령이 많은 노력을 기울인 것을 잘 알고 있다. 이 문제를 진전시키려는 강한 의지를 갖고 있다(4월 한미 정상회담).” “7대 교역국가인 한국과의 FTA는 한미 양국 국민을 위한 번영을 강화하고 증진시킬 것이다(5월 한덕수 주미 대사의 신임장을 제정 받으며).” 한미 정상이 6월 발표한 ‘한미동맹을 위한 공동비전’에도 ‘강력한 양자 간 경제 무역 투자 관계를 계속 심화시켜 나갈 것이다. 한미 FTA가 이러한 관계를 더욱 강화할 수 있다는 점을 인식하고 향후 진로를 계획하기 위해 함께 노력해 나가기로 했다’는 내용이 들어있다. (편집자 주: 상기 마지막 문장의 실제 내용은 이렇다. "우리는 한미 자유무역협정이 이러한 관계를 더욱 강화할 수 있다는 점을 인식하고 향후 진로를 계획하기 위해 함께 노력해 나가기로 하였다.)

오바마 대통령의 발언이 빈말이 아니었다면 지금쯤 한미 FTA 비준이 상당히 진척돼야 정상이다. 그런데 한미 FTA 서명 이후 2년 4개월이 흘렀지만 별다른 진척이 없다. 미국의 월스트리트저널은 27일자 사설에서 “오바마 대통령은 한미 FTA 비준을 위해 아무것도 한 게 없다”고 지적했다. 오바마 정부의 행보는 오래전 국회에 비준동의안을 제출한 한국 정부와도 대비된다. 

미국 여론도 한미 FTA에 호의적인 것으로 나타났다. 미 무역대표부(USTR)가 올해 7∼9월 FTA에 대한 미국 이해관계자들의 의견을 모아 보니 접수된 323건 가운데 92%가 찬성이었다. 이들은 FTA가 미국 경제 활성화는 물론이고 한미동맹 강화에도 도움이 된다며 조속한 처리를 촉구했다. 그럼에도 웬디 커틀러 USTR 대표보는 최근 자동차 분야를 거론하며 재협상에 대한 미련을 드러냈다. 특정산업의 눈치를 보느라 한미 FTA를 지연시키는 태도는 옳지 않다.

오바마 대통령이 내달 17, 18일 서울에 온다. 그가 FTA에 대해 어떤 카드를 내놓을지 궁금하다. 우리 정부는 아프가니스탄에 재건지원단을 보호할 병력 파견 계획을 곧 밝힐 예정이다. 국제평화정착을 위한 기여, 한미동맹과 미 대통령의 첫 방한을 배려해 내리는 결단이다. 조지 W 부시 전 대통령은 “한미 FTA는 정치동맹을 단단히 하는 시멘트 역할을 할 것”이라고 했다. 오바마 대통령의 진심을 알고 싶다.

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3848058|[중앙시평] 아프간 수렁에 빠질 각오 돼 있나]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 29일, 47면: 발췌)

배명복 논설위원

(유명환 외교통상부 장관은 한국 정부가 아프가니스탄 재파병 최종적으로 내렸다고 28일 국회에서 말했다.)

정부가 아프가니스탄 재파병 쪽으로 가닥을 잡은 모양이다. 아프간에 가 있는 민간인 위주의 지역재건팀(PRT) 규모를 25명에서 130명으로 늘리면서 이들의 안전을 담당할 보호병력 300~500명을 파견한다는 것이다. 파병을 하더라도 자위용 비전투병으로 보내는 것이지, 전투병을 보내는 것은 아니라는 게 정부 측 설명인 듯하다.

절반은 맞고, 절반은 틀린 말이다. 비전투병으로 갔어도 불가피한 교전에 휘말리면 전투병 역할을 하지 않을 수 없기 때문이다. 지금 아프간 상황에서 전투병과 비전투병의 구분은 사실상 무의미하다. 안전지대가 없다고 봐야 한다. 이라크의 안전한 지역에서 민사 작전을 수행하다 무사히 귀환한 자이툰 부대와는 상황이 근본적으로 다르다. 재파병 이후 어떤 일이 벌어질지 궁금하면 아프간의 독일군을 보면 된다.

아프간 파병 독일군은 PRT 보호 임무를 주로 맡아 왔다. 하지만 최근 들어 상황이 180도 달라졌다. 북부까지 세력을 확장한 탈레반의 공격에 맞서 교전을 벌이는 일이 잦아졌다. 자위용으로 파병됐지만 전사자가 56명까지 늘어갔다. …

…인질 사태의 악몽에도 불구하고 정부가 아프간 재파병 쪽으로 마음을 굳힌 배경은 이해할 만하다.

주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의 주최국에 걸맞은 글로벌 기여외교를 통해 국격을 높이는 일은 시급한 국가과제라고 봤을 것이다. 동맹국인 미국은 대놓고 말은 못 해도 한국의 군사적 기여를 고대하고 있다. 독자적 활동이 가능한 정도로 PRT 규모를 늘리면서 이들을 보호한다는 구실로 수백 명 정도의 병력을 보낸다면 아프간에 대한 기여도 늘리면서 파병 명분도 살릴 수 있다고 계산했을 법하다.

다음 달 중순으로 예정된 버락 오바마 미 대통령의 방한 전에 선수를 침으로써 우리의 독자적 결정이라는 인상을 심어줄 수 있다는 고려도 작용했을 것이다.

하지만 성급하다는 지적을 피하기 어렵다. 앞으로 아프간전을 어떻게 끌고 갈 것인지 미국 자신도 아직 결정하지 못했다. 전쟁의 목표 자체가 불분명하다. 무엇을 위해, 누구와 싸우는 것인지 그들 자신도 확신하지 못하고 있다. 9·11 테러 직후에는 이슬람 테러조직 알카에다에 은신처를 제공한 탈레반 정부를 전복하는 것이 목표일 수 있었다. 목표가 달성되자 안정적인 민주 정부를 수립하는 것으로 목표가 바뀌었다. 그 사이 알카에다는 파키스탄 접경 지대로 몸을 숨겼다. 쫓겨났던 탈레반은 (부패한 카불의 ‘괴뢰 정부’와 그 뒤를 받쳐주는) 외세에 대항한다는 명분으로 강력한 저항에 나섰다.

이런 판에 우리가 먼저 나서서 재파병 결정을 내릴 이유는 없는 것이다. 다음 달 7일 실시될 아프간 대선 결선투표 결과와 미국의 최종 선택까지 다 지켜본 뒤 결정해도 늦지 않다.

재파병을 한다면 우리도 수렁에 빠질 각오를 해야 한다. 상황이 종료되기 전 우리만 다시 빠져나온다는 것은 국제적 신의에 비추어 상상하기 어렵다. 사상자가 발생할 경우 추가 파병으로 이어질 가능성도 배제할 수 없다. 그럼에도 재파병 쪽으로 방침을 굳혔다면 모든 위험 요소를 국민에게 솔직하게 설명하고, 이해를 구해야 한다. 비전투병이란 포장어로 은근슬쩍 넘어가려 하다가는 훗날 훨씬 호된 대가를 치를 수 있음을 명심해야 한다.

**[[http://news.donga.com/Column/3/04/20091029/23753388/2|[기자의 눈/윤상호]심상치 않은 주한 미군 해외차출설]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 29일, 38면)

윤상호 정치부

지난해 6월 서울 용산 미군기지의 콜리어필드 체육관. 로버트 게이츠 미국 국방장관은 이상희 국방부 장관과 회담을 마친 뒤 기자회견에서 “어떤 결정을 내린 바 없고 조만간 그럴 계획도 없다”고 말했다. 두 달 전 주한미군의 아파치 공격헬기 1개 대대가 중동으로 차출될 것이라고 보도한 동아일보 기사를 부인하는 발언이었다. 대다수 언론은 게이츠 장관의 발언을 인용해 아파치 전력의 아프간 차출 가능성을 일축했다. 

하지만 5개월 뒤 양국은 아파치 대대의 중동 차출을 전격 발표했다. 양국은 아파치 헬기 대신 대전차 킬러인 A-10 공격기를 배치하기로 했다가 얼마 뒤엔 F-16 전투기로 바꾸는 등 후속조치에 혼선을 빚었다. F-16이 아파치 헬기의 전력공백을 메울 수 있느냐는 논란도 뒤따랐다.

최근 마이클 멀린 미 합참의장이 몇 년 안에 주한미군의 중동지역 이동배치를 검토한다고 밝혀 파장이 일었다. 국방부는 27일 “주한미군을 통해 확인한 바에 따르면 멀린 의장은 당시 장병들과 나눈 얘기는 공식답변이 아니며 주한미군 전력은 지금처럼 유지할 것이라고 밝혔다”고 해명했다.

하지만 군 안팎에선 멀린 의장의 발언을 미국이 주한미군을 다른 분쟁지역으로 투입하도록 양국이 합의한 ‘전략적 유연성(strategic flexibility)’을 본격 실행하겠다는 메시지로 보고 있다. 이런 기류는 1년 전 버웰 벨 당시 주한미군사령관의 이임 기자회견에서도 감지됐다. 벨 사령관은 “주한미군 병력 수준은 계속 유지될 것”이라면서도 “이라크와 아프간전쟁 승리를 위해 군사력을 전개할 수 있도록 보장해야 한다”고 강조했다.

일각에선 전시작전통제권이 전환되고 한미연합사가 해체되는 2012년을 전후해 주한미군 병력이 감축될 것으로 보고 있다. 한국군이 한반도 방어를 주도하면 미국은 전략적 유연성에 따라 주한미군 지상병력을 철수하거나 아프간 등으로 이동배치할 것이라는 얘기다. 멀린 의장이 주한미군의 중동지역 배치 가능성을 언급하면서 전시작전권 전환을 ‘중대한 변화’라고 강조한 것도 이런 관측을 뒷받침한다.

과거 주한미군 감축이나 해외 차출설이 나올 때마다 미국은 “당분간 또는 현재로선 계획이 없다”고 부인했다가 결국 자체 계획대로 실행에 옮겼다. 전례를 볼 때 정부는 좀 더 면밀하게 미국의 진의를 파악해 한반도 안보에 미칠 영향을 예측하고 대비해야 할 필요가 있다.

한미 연합전력의 대북 억지력을 유지하는 것은 국가의 안위와 직결된 문제다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1723.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001723 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 29, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Dong-a Ilbo 
Main Opposition DP Beats Ruling GNP in By-Elections by Winning 
Three of Five Contested Seats 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun, Segye Ilbo, Seoul 
Shinmun 
GNP Suffers Crushing Defeat in Seoul Metropolitan Area and 
Chungcheong Province 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------- 
 
12 ROK students who were studying in the U.S. have halted their 
study and returned home, because the owner of the boarding house 
where they stayed was arrested on Oct. 22 by local police for 
allegedly beating one of the students in his care. (JoongAng) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks Sung Kim and Ri Gun, Director 
General of American Affairs at North Korea's Foreign Ministry, 
exchanged views about regional security, including the North Korean 
nuclear issue, at the Northeast Asia Cooperative Dialogue in San 
Diego, but they had no formal contacts for direct U.S.-North Korea 
talks. (Hankook) 
 
A huge car bomb tore through a busy market in northwestern Pakistan 
on Oct. 28, killing nearly 100 people. The blast came just three 
hours after Secretary of State Hillary Clinton arrived in the 
country for talks. (All) 
 
In Afghanistan on the same day, Taliban gunmen attacked a guest 
house used by UN staff, killing 12 people including six UN 
employees. (All) 
 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
- N. Korea 
---------- 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo carried an inside-page report from Washington 
that Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks Sung Kim and Ri Gun, 
Director General of American Affairs at North Korea's Foreign 
Ministry, exchanged views about regional security, including the 
North Korean nuclear issue, at the Oct. 26-27 Northeast Asia 
Cooperative Dialogue in San Diego but that they had no formal 
contacts for direct U.S.-North Korea talks. 
 
The report quoted sources as predicting at least one or two more 
contacts between the U.S. and North Korea, since Director Ri will 
stay in New York for six days to attend another security forum 
organized by the National Committee on American Foreign Policy 
(NCAFP) and the Korea Society. 
 
- Aid for Afghanistan 
--------------------- 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo carried a commentary headed, "Is the 
ROK Ready to Get Bogged Down in Afghanistan?"  It said: "It is 
almost meaningless to draw a distinction between combatants and 
non-combatants in the current Afghan situation.  There is no safety 
zone. ...   The U.S. has yet to decide how to lead the Afghan war in 
the future.  ... In this situation, there is no reason for us to 
make a decision to redeploy troops to the war-torn country.  It will 
not be too late to wait until the Nov. 7 presidential runoff 
election in Afghanistan and the U.S. reaches a final decision." 
 
SEOUL 00001723  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
- Terrorist Attacks in Pakistan and Afghanistan 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
All newspapers led their international news section with reports on 
Oct. 28 terrorist attacks on both sides of the Afghan-Pakistani 
border.  According to media reports, the brutal bomb attack in 
Pakistan came just three hours after Secretary of State Hillary 
Clinton arrived in the country for talks. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo wrote in the headline: "All-out 
Counterattacks in Pakistan, Afghanistan... October Marks Deadliest 
Month for U.S. Military."  Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo's headline 
read: "Taliban Attack UN Guest House to Obstruct Next Month's 
Presidential Run-off Election" 
 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
OBAMA AND THE KOREA-US FTA 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 29, 2009, page 38) 
 
By Editorial writer Bang Hyung-nam 
 
President Barack Obama has made several comments on the Korea-U.S. 
free trade agreement this year.  At a bilateral summit in April, he 
said, "I understand that ROK President Lee Myung-bak has made a lot 
of efforts to pursue the Korea-U.S. FTA.  I have a strong will to 
pursue the FTA."  In receiving credentials from ROK Ambassador to 
the U.S. Han Duck-soo, Obama said that "an FTA with Korea, our 
seventh-largest trading partner, will boost prosperity for the 
people of the two nations."  The Joint Vision for the ROK-U.S. 
Alliance, a statement released by both leaders in June (following 
the June 16 Summit in Washington), also says, "We will continue to 
deepen our strong bilateral economic, trade and investment 
relations."  It goes on to say that "based on the recognition that 
the agreement will further strengthen such relations, we'll work 
together to plan our way to go for the future."  (Editor's Note: 
The final sentence above actually reads "We recognize that the 
Korea-U.S. (KORUS) Free Trade Agreement could further strengthen 
these ties, and we are committed to working together to chart a way 
forward." 
 
If Obama's comments were not an empty promise, the ratification of 
the deal might have proceeded more smoothly.  Yet little progress 
has been made 28 months after the accord was signed.  In an opinion 
piece Tuesday, the Wall Street Journal said Obama has done nothing 
to get the agreement ratified.  His administration's stance is in 
stark contrast to that of the ROK Government, which presented the 
deal to the National Assembly for ratification long ago. 
 
Americans favor ratification of the free trade deal.  When the U.S. 
Trade Representative conducted a survey of 288 American businesses 
in July, 92 percent said they back ratification.  They urged 
Washington to promptly ratify the pact, saying it will contribute to 
U.S. economic growth and improve bilateral relations in security and 
diplomacy.  Nevertheless, Assistant U.S. Trade Representative Wendy 
Cutler is pinning hopes on renegotiation due to fears in the auto 
sector.  Delaying the deal's ratification because of one certain 
industry is not right. 
 
Obama will arrive in Seoul Nov. 18 for a two-day visit.  What 
suggestions he will make is attracting interest.  Over the short 
term, Korea will announce a plan to send troops to Afghanistan to 
protect reconstruction teams to contribute to world peace, 
strengthen its alliance with the U.S., and mark Obama's first visit 
to Korea.  His predecessor President George W. Bush said, "The 
Korea-U.S. FTA will further cement political ties between the U.S. 
and Korea."  It is a high time for Obama to speak from his heart. 
 
 
IS THE ROK READY TO GET BOGGED DOWN IN AFGHANISTAN? 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 29, 2009, page 47: Excerpts) 
 
SEOUL 00001723  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
By Editorial writer Bae Myung-bok 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan told the National Assembly It seems 
that the ROKG has finally decided to redeploy troops to Afghanistan. 
 The ROKG plans to increase the number of Provincial Reconstruction 
Team (PRT) personnel to 130 from the current 25 and send a 300 to 
500 person-strong guard force to protect them.  The ROKG apparently 
wants to emphasize its position that it will send non-combatant 
forces only for self-defense, not combatant forces. 
 
What the ROKG claims is half right and half wrong.  Even if 
non-combatant forces are deployed, they cannot but serve as 
combatants when embroiled in a battle.  It is almost meaningless to 
draw a distinction between combatants and non-combatants in the 
current Afghan situation.  There is no safety zone.   This situation 
is fundamentally different from when the Zaytun unit was deployed to 
carry out civil affairs operation in a secure area of Iraq and 
returned safely.  German troops in Afghanistan are a good example 
indicating what could happen if we send our troops. 
 
Germany deployed its troops to Afghanistan mainly to protect the 
PRTs.  However, things began to turn different.  They often engaged 
in a battle to counter attacks from the Taliban which expanded its 
presence to northern Afghanistan.  So far, 56 German soldiers have 
been killed. 
 
It is understandable why the ROKG decided to redeploy troops to 
Afghanistan despite the lingering nightmare of the hostage incident. 
 It is likely that the ROKG viewed it as an urgent task to enhance 
its national status by making contributions to the world as a host 
of the next G20 Summit.  The U.S. anticipates assistance to 
Afghanistan from the ROK even if it has not made a direct request. 
The ROK apparently calculated that it can make further contributions 
to Afghanistan and have the desired effect by deciding to expand the 
number of PRT personnel and send hundreds of troops to protect them. 
 The ROKG also wanted to demonstrate that it has made its own 
decision on troop redeployment ahead of President Obama's visit to 
the ROK. 
 
However, it is hard to avoid an argument that this decision has been 
made too hastily.  The U.S. has yet to decide how to lead the Afghan 
war in the future.  The goal of the Afghanistan war is unclear.  It 
is likely that shortly after the 9.11 terrorist attack, the U.S. 
aimed to overthrow the Taliban regime which provided a shelter to 
Islam terrorist al-Qaida.  When this goal was realized, the U.S. 
focused on establishing a stable and democratic government in 
Afghanistan.  In the meantime, al-Qaida hid out in the border area 
of Pakistan and the Taliban intensified its resistance against 
foreign forces. 
 
In this situation, there is no reason for us to make a decision to 
redeploy troops to the war-torn country.  It will not be too late to 
wait until the Nov. 7 presidential runoff election in Afghanistan 
and the U.S. reaches a final decision. 
 
In order to redeploy troops to Afghanistan, we should be ready to 
get bogged down there.  It is hard to image that only the ROK would 
get out of Afghanistan before the war is over because it would 
breach international trust.  We cannot rule out the possibility that 
any casualties inflicted would lead to additional troop deployment. 
In spite of this, if the ROK has decided to redeploy troops, it 
should candidly explain all risks involved to people and seek their 
understanding.  The ROKG should bear in mind that if the ROKG tries 
to gloss over this situation with an expression of "non-combatants", 
it could face harsher consequences later. 
 
WORRYING TALK OF OVERSEAS DEPLOYMENT OF USFK 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 29, 2009, Page 38) 
 
By Political Affairs Reporter Yoon Sang-ho 
 
In June, 2008, after a meeting with Minister of National Defense Lee 
Sang-hee, U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said during a press 
 
SEOUL 00001723  004 OF 004 
 
 
conference at Collier Field House in Yongsan Garrison, "No decision 
has been made, nor will one be made soon, (about sending the 
Apaches.)"  The statement was designed as a response to a Dong-a 
Ilbo article two weeks earlier which said that the USFK battalion of 
Apache attack helicopters would be deployed to the Middle East 
region.  Most media outlets quoted Secretary Gates' statement, 
downplaying the possibility of an Apache battalion being sent to 
Afghanistan. 
 
Five months later, however, the ROK and the U.S. announced that the 
Apache battalion would be deployed off the peninsula.  The two 
nations initially decided to replace Apache helicopters with the 
A-10 anti-tank aircraft but later said that F-16 fighter jets would 
replace Apache helicopters, creating confusion.  Controversy ensued 
over whether F-16s would be able to fill a possible security vacuum 
left by the withdrawal of the Apache battalion. 
 
Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Michael Mullen 
recently sparked controversy by saying that the U.S. is considering 
sending some USFK troops to the Middle East.  The Ministry of 
National Defense explained on October 27, "According to the USFK on 
October 27, Adm. Mullen said that his response to USFK servicemen 
was not an official one, and the USFK troop level will remain at the 
current level." 
 
However, observers inside and outside the military view Adm. 
Mullen's remark as a message saying that the U.S. will earnestly 
implement the USFK's "strategic flexibility," under which USFK 
troops will be deployed to other troubled parts of the world.  This 
atmosphere was felt a year ago, too, when Gen. Burwell Bell held his 
last press conference as the USFK commander.  While saying, "The 
U.S. will maintain troop levels in the ROK," Gen. Bell emphasized, 
however, that (the U.S.) should be guaranteed to deploy its military 
power to ensure victory in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
 
Some observers predict that around the year 2012, when the wartime 
operational control of ROK troops is transferred to the ROK, and the 
ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command is dissolved, there will be U.S. 
troop cuts in the ROK.  In other words, when the ROK military takes 
the leadership in defending the nation, the U.S. will withdraw U.S. 
ground troops from the ROK or redeploy them to Afghanistan.  This 
speculation is bolstered by the fact that Adm. Mullen described the 
OPCON transfer as a "significant change" while mentioning the 
possibility of sending some USFK troops to the Middle East. 
 
In the past, whenever there was talk of reducing the number of USFK 
troops or pulling them out of the peninsula, the U.S. first denied 
it, saying, "We have no such plan for the time being or at present," 
but in the end, the U.S. put its original plan into action.  Based 
on these precedents, the ROKG should figure out the true intention 
of Washington more thoroughly and fully brace for any impact that 
Washington's intention may have on security on the Korean Peninsula. 
 For the ROK-U.S combined forces to maintain deterrence against 
North Korea is directly linked with our security. 
 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>