^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1592  |  2009-10-07  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KMDR KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 반응 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 02 SEOUL 001592

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KMDR, KS, US
제 목: 서울, 언론 반응
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명)  --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/05 13:20//

===== 동아시아 태평양: 북한 =====

**[[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/06/2009100601784.html|[사설] 6자회담 앞선 美北대화는 짧을수록 좋다]]**

보수 조선일보 사설 10월 7일: "'다자회담에는 6자회담도 포함돼 있다'는 김 위원장의 말 역시 상황에 따라서는 북한이 6자회담 대신 북한이 선호하는 미국·북한·중국의 3자회담 카드를 들이밀 수도 있다는 복선(伏線)을 깔고 있는 발언이다. 결국 원자바오 중국 총리의 방북은 북한이 반드시 6자회담으로 복귀할 것이라는 약속이 아닌 다자회담 복귀 '용의 표명'만 받고 북한에 대규모 경제원조를 제공하기로 한 셈이다. 중국이 유엔 제재가 발효 중인 상황에서 이처럼 선(先)원조약속이라는 보상을 해 주는 것은 지난날 북한 다루기의 잘못을 또 되풀이하는 것이다. 이런 접근은 대북 제재의 국제협력 체제를 무너뜨리고 6자회담 참가국들의 대북 협상력을 크게 떨어뜨릴 우려가 크다."

**[[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3497861|[사설] 북·미대화 추인용 6자회담 안 된다]]**

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설 10월 7일: "…김정일 위원장은 이번 회담에서 핵 문제는 북·미대화에서 논의하고 6자회담은 이를 추인하는 방식을 생각하고 있음을 드러냈다. 이에 비해 미국은 핵 문제 해결방안 논의는 6자회담 틀 안에서만 가능하며 북·미대화는 6자회담을 위한 징검다리로 간주하고 있다. 이 같은 입장 차이가 어느 정도 해소돼야 미국의 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 평양 방문이 이뤄질 전망이다. …따라서 ‘압박과 대화’라는 투 트랙 정책은 최소한 북한의 핵포기가 되돌릴 수 없는 상황에 도달했다는 확신이 설 때까지 유지해야 한다."

[사설]중국, 북한 非核化더 멀어지게 하나

보수 동아일보 사설 10월 7일: "북이 선물 보따리를 받아들고 중국의 체면을 살려주기 위해 마음에 없는 ‘6자회담’을 언급했을 가능성이 크다. 중국의 지원이 북에 대한 국제적 제재 내용을 담은 유엔 결의 1874호에 위배되지 않는지 면밀히 따져봐야 한다. …중국이 대북 영향력을 유지하기 위해 유엔이 금지한 지원을 약속했다면 안보리 상임이사국 자격이 없다. 북은 중국의 태도를 보고 국제제재 전선에 균열이 생겼다고 판단해 핵 개발에 더 자신감을 가질 수도 있다."

[사설] 6자회담 복원의 공을 떠넘긴 북한

중도 한국일보 사설 10월 7일: "어쨌든 공은 이제 북한에서 6자회담의 나머지 참가국들 쪽으로 넘어온 형국이다. …(미국은) 국제사회의 대북제재 공조의 틀을 유지하면서 확실한 6자회담 복귀를 이끌어내기 위해 신중을 기하겠지만, 완착으로 모처럼 조성된 기회를 놓쳐서는 안 될 것이다."

[사설]북-중 합의로 한계 드러난 대북 압박정책 전환해야

좌파 성향 한겨레신문 사설 10월 7일: "이번 북-중 정상회담이 우리나라를 포함한 국제사회에 던지는 의미는 크게 두 가지다. 하나는 북한에 대한 중국의 대규모 경제원조 약속으로, 대북 제재가 사실상 효력을 잃었다는 것이다. 지난해 기준으로 북한 전체 무역의 70% 이상을 차지하고 있는 중국이 대규모 원조와 경제협력을 약속한 마당에, 제재를 통해 북한을 압박하자는 것은 말장난에 불과하다. 다른 하나는 두 나라가 우호관계를 ‘세세대대’로 이어가기로 한 점이다. 이는 중국이 북한의 체제를 장기적인 관점에서 보장하겠다는 것을 의미한다. 북한과 중국 사이에 ‘신밀월시대’가 도래했다고 할 만하다. 상황이 이렇게 된 데는 북한에 대한 압박 차원에서 남북 교류·협력을 철저하게 차단해온 이 정부의 탓도 크다."

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다 
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1592.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SEOUL 001592 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KMDR, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - MEDIA REACTION 
 
Subject: Media Reaction; Seoul 
 
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC: DPRK 
 
"China Weakens Impact of Pressure on N. Korea" 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized (10/07): "North Korean leader 
Kim Jong-il's statement, 'North Korea is ready to hold multilateral 
talks and these talks include the Six-Party Talks,' suggests that 
North Korea, depending on circumstances, may push trilateral talks 
with the U.S. and China, instead of the Six-Party Talks.  After all, 
Chinese Premier Wen's visit to Pyongyang resulted in massive 
economic aid to North Korea in return for the North's mere 
'expression of willingness' to return to multilateral talks, instead 
of its clear promise to return to the Six-Party Talks.  This 
situation amounts to China repeating the mistake of the past of 
rewarding North Korea before it has done anything, especially when 
UN sanctions are still in effect.  This approach weakens 
international pressure on North Korea and the negotiating powers of 
the countries in the Six-Party Talks." 
 
 
"No Point in Six-Party Talks If They Only Confirm What Is Discussed 
in U.S.-North Korea Bilateral Talks" 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo's editorialized (10/07): "... North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-il's (statement) reveals his belief that 
discussion on the nuclear issue should be between the U.S. and North 
Korea, and that the Six-Party Talks will confirm (whatever outcome 
results from those talks).  The U.S. believes, however, that any 
discussions about the resolution of the nuclear issue must be within 
the framework of the Six-Party Talks and that U.S.-North Korea 
dialogue should serve as a stepping stone for the multilateral 
talks.  A visit to Pyongyang by U.S. Special Representative for 
North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth is likely to be realized when 
this difference in position is narrowed to some degree. ... The 
two-track approach of 'pressure and dialogue' should be maintained 
until there is an assurance that North Korea's nuclear abandonment 
is irreversible." 
 
 
"China's Failure to Do More" 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized (10/07): "It is highly likely 
that the North mentioned the Six-Party Talks as a face-saving 
measure for China.  China's (economic) assistance may also violate 
U.N. Security Council Resolution 1874 sanctioning North Korea. ... 
If Beijing promised assistance banned by the U.N. to maintain its 
influence over Pyongyang, it does not deserve a seat at the U.N. 
Security Council.  Rather, this could further encourage North Korea 
to develop nuclear weapons, judging that international sanctions 
against it might no longer be as strict as they used to be." 
 
 
"N. Korea Throws Ball for Six-Party Talks into Other Countries' 
Court" 
 
Moderate Hankook ILbo editorialized (10/07): "The ball is now in 
other Six-Party countries' court. ... The U.S. is likely to take 
cautious steps to make sure that North Korea will return to the 
Six-Party Talks while the international community continues to 
cooperate to enforce sanctions against North Korea.  The U.S., 
however, should not miss this rare opportunity by moving too 
slowly." 
 
 
"Lee Administration Must Change Obsolete N. Korea Policy" 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun editorialized (10/07): "Broadly 
speaking, the significance of this North Korea-China meeting for the 
international community, including the ROK, is twofold.  First, with 
China agreeing to large-scale economic aid to North Korea, sanctions 
against North Korea have been rendered virtually powerless.  With 
China-which accounted for over 70 percent of North Korean trade last 
 
SEOUL 00001592  002 OF 002 
 
 
year -pledging large-scale economic cooperation, pressuring the 
North through sanctions is nothing more than a joke.  The other 
point of significance is that the two nations have pledged to 
strengthen their friendship 'for generations to come.'  This means 
China will support the North Korean regime in the long-term.  One 
could say a honeymoon era has begun between North Korea and China. 
The Lee Myung-bak Administration is greatly at fault for the fact 
that the situation has reached this point, since it has thoroughly 
blocked exchanges and cooperation with North Korea." 
 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>