^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1925 | 2009-12-07 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 7일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001925

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 7일
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/06/14 10:15//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
중기(中企)노조엔 전임(專任) 1~2명 보장

중앙일보
오늘 개막 코펜하겐 기후회의엔 105개국 정상 참석

동아일보
'미래의 중국' 시진핑 모시기

한국일보
내년 한국 경제 키워드 '슬로~슬로'

한겨레 신문 세계일보
노사정 반쪽합의 '노조법 대치'

서울신문
"무허가 어업 보상 제외" 피해 약 380억 깎였다

===== 국내 동향 =====

스티븐스 대북정책 특별대표가 8~10일 방북을 앞두고 6일 서울을 방문해 한국 정부 관계자와 대북 의제를 조율할 예정이다. (전체)

한국군의 아프가니스탄 파병 기간을 종전의 1년에서 2년 6개월로 늘리기로 한 정부 방안이 재검토될 것이라고 국회 국방위 관계자들이 6일 밝혔다. 왜냐면 국방위 소속 여야 의원들은 “버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 2011년 7월부터 아프가니스탄에서 미군 철수를 개시하겠다고 밝혔는데, 우리 군을 2012년 말까지 파병하는 게 타당하냐”며 파병기간을 재검토하라고 요구했기 때문이다. ([[http://news.joins.com/article/3909715|중앙일보]])

===== 미디어 분석 =====
==== 아프간 전략 ====

국영 연합뉴스는 5일 토요일자 워싱턴 발 보도에서 제임스 존스 국가안보보좌관이 12월 4일 미국의 아프간전 전략에 대한 외신기자 간담회에서 "미국이 가까운 장래에(in the near future)에 아프간에서 떠날 의향을 갖고 있지 않다"고 밝혔다고 전했다. 이 같은 언급은 버락 오바마 대통령이 새 아프간 전략 발표 대국민연설에서 "미군이 2011년 철군하기 시작할 것"이라고 언급한 이후 미국이 2011년까지 아프간에서 완전히 철수할 것이라는 역내 동맹국들 사이의 우려를 차단하기 위한 것으로 보인다.

==== 북한 ====

모든 한국 언론은 7일 스티븐스 대북정책 특별대표가 8~10일 방북을 앞두고 6일 서울을 방문해 한국 정부 관계자와 대북 의제를 조율할 예정이라고 전했다.

대다수 언론은 보즈워스 대사가 공항서 취재진을 피해 (입국장을 거치지 않고) 공항 계류장에서 승용차편으로 바로 숙소로 향했다며 이에 대해 외교부 관계자는 "북.미대화를 앞두고 공개발언을 자제하는 게 바람직하다는 전략적 판단을 내린 것으로 보인다"고 말했다고 전했다.

보수 조선일보의 언급: "북한은 보즈워스 일행의 최우선 관심사인 '6자회담 복귀'보다 '선(先) 평화협정 논의'에 초점을 맞추고 있어 이번 대화가 성과 없이 끝날 것이라는 우려도 나오고 있다."

중도 한국일보 사설: "북한이 6자회담 복귀와 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행을 전제로 한반도 평화체제와 북미관계 진전을 요구한다면 미국측도 유연하게 대응할 가능성이 있다. 핵을 완전히 폐기하면 무엇을 해주겠다는 경직된 자세로는 북한의 변화를 이끌어 내기 어렵다고 보고 관계 정상화를 통한 핵 폐기 등 보다 적극적인 발상의 전환을 할 수도 있는 것이다. …우리 정부도 북미 간에 평화협정 문제가 논의될 가능성을 경계하기보다는 북미관계의 진전 등으로 변화될 정세에 적극적으로 대비해야 한다."

==== 기후 변화 ====

보수 [[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/12/06/2009120600797.html|조선일보 7일자 사설]]: "코펜하겐 회의에서 교토의정서를 대체할 협약이 타결될지는 아직 알 수 없다. 법적 규제력을 갖는 협약이 완성되지 않는다 하더라도 6개월이나 1년쯤 뒤 새 협약이 탄생하리라는 전망이 유력하다. 국제사회는 코펜하겐에서 일이 매듭지어지지 않더라도 어떻게든 교토의정서를 대체하는 온난화 협약을 만들어 2013년 이후에 대비하지 않으면 안 되기 때문이다."

전 세계 56개 신문과의 공동 사설에서 중도 우파 중앙일보가 주장한 내용: "코펜하겐에서 완벽한 협약이 체결되리라고 믿는 사람은 거의 없다. 합의에 이르는 실제 과정은 버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 귀국해 기후 변화 협약에 반대해 온 의회를 설득하는 데에서 시작될 것이다. 그러나 코펜하겐에 모인 정치인들은 핵심 사안들, 그리고 향후 협약 체결 일정에 합의할 수 있고, 또 합의해야만 한다. 내년 6월 독일 본에서 열리는 유엔 기후 변화 회의가 데드라인이 돼야 한다. 한 협상가의 “연장전에 들어갈 수는 있지만, 재경기는 안 된다”는 말을 새겨야 한다."
===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설] 보즈워스 방북 이후에 잘 대비해야**(한국일보, 12월 6일, 39면)

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표 일행 5명이 북미 양자회담을 위해 내일 방북한다. 어제 오후 내한한 보즈워스 특별대표 일행은 오산 공군기지에서 특별전용기 편으로 평양에 도착, 10일까지 머무르며 강석주 외무성 제1부상 등과 회담하고 6자회담 복귀 등을 촉구할 것이라고 한다.

버락 오바마 미 대통령의 특사이기도 한 보즈워스 특별대표의 방북은 북핵 문제에 중대한 갈림길이 될 것이 분명하다. 오바마 정부 들어 북미 공식 차원의 첫 회담이라는 점에서도 비상한 관심을 모은다. 미국측은 6자회담 복귀 및 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행을 촉구하는 것 외에 다른 협상은 하지 않는다고 밝혔지만, 이를 곧이곧대로 받아들이기는 어렵다. 북핵 문제 진전과 연계된 북미관계 개선과 한반도 평화체제 문제 등이 폭넓게 논의될 개연성이 높기 때문이다.

회담 전망에 대해서는 낙관과 비관이 교차한다. 일부에서는 북한이 핵 폐기와 체제보장 및 경제 지원을 맞바꾸는 것이 핵심인 9ㆍ19공동성명 틀을 벗어나 핵 보유국 인정을 염두에 두고 평화협정 체결 문제를 앞세울지 모른다고 우려하고 있다. 이 경우 모처럼 조성된 대화와 협상분위기는 물거품이 되고 갈등과 대결 국면으로 되돌아갈 수밖에 없다. 북한은 6자회담 나머지 참가국과 국제사회의 의지를 시험하려 해서는 안 된다. 어떤 경우에도 북핵을 용인하는 일은 없을 것이기 때문이다.

그러나 북한이 6자회담 복귀와 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행을 전제로 한반도 평화체제와 북미관계 진전을 요구한다면 미국측도 유연하게 대응할 가능성이 있다. 핵을 완전히 폐기하면 무엇을 해주겠다는 경직된 자세로는 북한의 변화를 이끌어 내기 어렵다고 보고 관계 정상화를 통한 핵 폐기 등 보다 적극적인 발상의 전환을 할 수도 있는 것이다. 한반도평화체제 구축문제는 9ㆍ19공동성명과 2ㆍ13합의에도 포함돼 있는 만큼 6자회담 틀 속에서 논의돼야 하는 것은 당연하다. 우리 정부도 북미 간에 평화협정 문제가 논의될 가능성을 경계하기보다는 북미관계의 진전 등으로 변화될 정세에 적극적으로 대비해야 한다.

===== 특집 =====

**'평양 2박3일' 보즈워스 뭘 가져올까**(조선일보, 2009년 12월 7일, 4면)

임민혁 기자

버락 오바마(Obama) 미 대통령의 특사 자격으로 8~10일 평양을 방문하는 스티븐 보즈워스(Bosworth) 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 방북에 앞서 한·미 간 북핵정책 최종 조율을 위해 6일 방한했다.

보즈워스 대표는 이날 오후 인천공항을 통해 입국하면서 철저하게 언론을 따돌리는 모습을 보였다. 그는 입국장에 대기하고 있던 취재진을 피해 계류장에서 곧바로 주한 미국대사관에서 마련한 승용차를 타고 서울시내 숙소로 이동했다.

정부 소식통은 "미측에서 '언론과의 접촉을 최소화할 수 있도록 협조해 달라'고 요청을 해왔다.

보즈워스 대표는 이날 기내(機內)에서 남아프리카공화국 출장을 마치고 귀국하던 정몽준 한나라당 대표와도 우연히 만나 대화를 나눴지만, 방북 문제와 관련해선 "북한이 어떻게 나올지 누가 알겠느냐"며 역시 말을 아낀 것으로 전해졌다.

보즈워스 대표는 7일 북핵 6자회담 우리측 수석대표인 위성락 외교통상부 한반도평화교섭본부장과 만나 미·북대화의 의제와 방향 등을 최종 점검하고, 유명환 외교부 장관, 김성환 청와대 외교안보수석 등과도 면담할 것으로 전해졌다.

그는 8일 오후 오산 공군기지에서 특별전용기를 이용해 평양을 방문, 2박3일간 체류하며 강석주 북한 외무성 제1부상 등과 양자대화를 할 예정이다.

하지만 북한은 보즈워스 일행의 최우선 관심사인 '6자회담 복귀'보다 '선(先) 평화협정 논의'에 초점을 맞추고 있어 이번 대화가 성과 없이 끝날 것이라는 우려도 나오고 있다.

(이 기사는 조선일보가 제공한 번역이다. 우리는 조선일보 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 마지막 문장을 추가하였다.)

[[http://media.daum.net/breakingnews/view.html?cateid=1068&newsid=20091206172311571|보즈워스 입국..'근접취재' 원천봉쇄]](연합뉴스, 2009년 12월 6일)

유현민 기자

공항서 취재진 피해 계류장서 곧바로 이동

오는 8일 방북에 앞서 한국과의 협의를 위해 6일 오후 인천공항을 통해 입국한 스티븐 보즈워스 미 국무부 대북정책 특별대표는 '언론의 근접취재'를 허용하지 않았다.

런던발 대한항공편으로 6일 오후 4시께 인천공항에 도착한 보즈워스 대표는 항공기와 입국장을 연결하는 탑승교에 설치된 비상계단을 이용해 계류장으로 내려와 주한 미국대사관 측에서 마련한 검은색 포드 승용차를 타고 공항을 떠났다.

취재진을 피해 입국장을 거치지 않고 곧바로 서울시내의 숙소로 이동한 것이다.

이에 따라 대기 중이던 38명의 국내외 취재진들은 탑승교의 대형 유리창을 통해서 보즈워스 대표가 계단을 내려와 차량에 올라타는 모습만을 취재할 수밖에 없었다.

이 같은 '근접취재 차단' 조치는 미 국무부의 요청에 따른 것으로 알려졌다.

외교부 관계자는 "주한 미국대사관의 요청으로 보즈워스 대표가 입국장을 거치지 않고 공항 계류장에서 승용차편으로 바로 숙소로 향할 것"이라며 "북.미대화를 앞두고 공개발언을 자제하는 게 바람직하다는 전략적 판단을 내린 것으로 보인다"고 말했다.

미측은 이 밖에도 보즈워스 대표를 비롯한 미국 대표단이 방한 기간 체류할 숙소를 외교부 관계자들에게도 통보하지 않은 것으로 전해졌다.

다른 관계자는 "주한 미국대사관 측에서 보즈워스 대표의 서울시내 숙소를 알려주지 않았다"면서 "지금까지 관례에 비춰볼 때 이는 이례적인 것"이라고 말했다.

보즈워스 대표는 한 걸음 더 나아가 7일로 예정된 위성락 한반도평화교섭본부장과의 면담 모두(冒頭)부분을 빼고는 나머지 일정과 동선을 모두 비공개에 부치겠다는 입장인 것으로 전해졌다.

특히 위 본부장과의 면담 이후 '도어스텝'(공개된 장소에서 사진촬영과 함께 언론취재에 응하는 절차)도 생략할 예정이며 방북 이후 대 언론 발표 일정도 아직 정하지 않았다는 게 소식통들의 전언이다.

이를 두고 북.미 양자대화에 대한 전략적 판단을 감안하더라도 보즈워스 대표의 한국 언론에 대한 기피증이 너무 심한 게 아니냐는 곱지 않은 시선도 일각에서는 나오고 있다.

북.미대화를 앞둔 시점에서 언론과 사전접촉이 부담스러울 수는 있지만, 국내는 물론 세계적으로 이목이 집중된 자신의 움직임을 뚜렷한 사전설명 없이 '노출'하지 않겠다고 하는 것은 다소 이해가 가지 않는다는 얘기다.

한 외교소식통은 "언론에 대한 개인적 스타일의 문제일 수는 있지만 이런 큰 사안을 두고 언론과의 접촉을 피할 수 있다고 생각하는 것이 이해되지 않는다"며

"과연 미국에서 이런 사안이 생겼을 때 그럴까 하는 생각이 든다"고 말했다.
[[http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/Article.aspx?aid=2913577|AFGHANISTAN STAYS COULD BE SHORTENED]]((중앙일보 영문 기사 번역 생략))

**존스 "2011년 아프간 완전철군 없다"**(연합뉴스, 2009년 12월 5일)

성기홍 특파원

제임스 존스 미국 백악관 국가안보보좌관은 4일 미군이 가까운 장래에 아프가니스탄에서 철수할 계획을 갖고 있지 않으며, `철군완료시점'이 2011년이 되지는 않을 것이라는 입장을 밝혔다.

존스 보좌관은 이날 미국의 아프간전 전략에 대한 외신기자 간담회에서 "미국이 가까운 장래에(in the near future)에 아프간에서 떠날 의향을 갖고 있지 않다"고 밝혔다.

…이 같은 언급은 버락 오바마 대통령이 새 아프간 전략 발표 대국민연설에서 "미군이 2011년 철군하기 시작할 것"이라고 언급한 이후 미국이 2011년까지 아프간에서 완전히 철수할 것이라는 역내 동맹국들 사이의 우려를 차단하기 위한 것으로 보인다.

존스 보좌관은 "10만명 이상의 아프간 주둔 미군과 나토 동맹군의 추가 파병, 비(非) 나토 국가들의 기여 등을 통해 아프간 정부가 국내 문제를 책임질 수 있도록 하는 목표를 달성할 수 있을 것으로 확신한다"고 말했다. 그는 "그러한 목표가 이뤄져야 미군 일부의 철군이 시작될 수 있을 것"이라며 "물론 그것은 현지 상황에 대한 검토를 바탕으로 이뤄질 것"이라고 강조했다.

하지만 존스 보좌관은 미군의 아프간 개입이 "영원히 지속되지는 않을 것이며, 오바마 대통령은 아프간 현지 상황의 실질적 변화를 볼 수 있는 합리적인 시간 계획을 맞추기 위해 모든 노력을 집중할 것"이라고 강조했다.

한편 미국은 나토 회원국 등 국제사회가 오바마 대통령의 아프간전 추가 파병 방침에 호응해 7천명의 병력을 추가 파병키로 결정한데 대해 사의를 표명하면서 가까운 장래에 후속 증강 조치도 기대했다.

로버트 기브스 백악관 대변인은 "나토군 7천명의 증강은 아프간전 수행에서 강력한 기여라고 생각하며, 이것은 매우 긍정적인 전개라고 판단한다"고 말했다.

이언 켈리 국무부 대변인은 정례브리핑에서 "나토를 비롯, 파트너국가들이 7천명의 파병을 약속했다"며 "하지만 7천명의 수치가 끝이 아니기를 기대하며, 가까운 장래에 수천명이 더 추가 되기를 기대한다"고 말했다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1925.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 7, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
ROKG, Representatives of Labor and Management Agree to Allow Company 
to Pay One or Two Full-Time Unionists 
at Small and Mid-Sized Companies 
after Company-Paid Wage Ban Takes Effect Next July 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Climate Talks Begin in Copenhagen Today 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
ROKG Spares No Pains to Make Upcoming Visit by China's Vice 
President Xi Jinping Successful 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
"Slow" Is Keyword for New Year's ROK Economy; Major Economic 
Research Institutes Predict Slow Economic Recovery in ROK Next Year 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun, Segye Ilbo 
Clash Expected between Ruling Party and Main Opposition Democratic 
Party (DP) over New Labor Agreement, 
as DP Opposes It 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
Price Caps on New Real Estate in Free Economic Zones 
to be Eliminated Next Year 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
arrived in Seoul yesterday for talks with ROK officials on agenda 
items ahead of his Dec. 8-10 visit to North Korea. (All) 
 
According to sources with the National Assembly, the Defense 
Ministry will review the ROKG's plan to extend the tour of troops to 
be dispatched to Afghanistan from the original one year to two and a 
half years, because ruling and opposition lawmakers called for a 
review of the period, claiming: "It's not appropriate for Korean 
troops to stay in Afghanistan when President Barack Obama has 
announced plans to start withdrawing U.S. troops beginning in July 
2011." (JoongAng) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-Afghanistan Strategy 
---------------------- 
State-run Yonhap News Agency carried a report from Washington on 
Saturday (Dec. 5) quoting U.S. National Security Adviser James Jones 
as saying in a Dec. 4 press briefing: "The U.S. has no intention of 
leaving Afghanistan in the near future, certainly not in 2011."  The 
report viewed this remark as aimed at precluding concerns in the 
region - following President Obama's statement on withdrawal of U.S. 
troops from Afghanistan beginning in July 2011 - that the U.S. may 
completely pull out troops from the war-torn country by 2011. 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
All ROK media today covered U.S. Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth's arrival in Seoul yesterday for talks 
with ROK officials on agenda items ahead of his Dec. 8-10 visit to 
the North. 
 
Most media noted that Ambassador Bosworth dodged reporters waiting 
at the arrivals terminal by getting into a car on the tarmac and 
went to his quarters in downtown Seoul.  An ROKG source was quoted 
 
SEOUL 00001925  002 OF 006 
 
 
as saying: "It seems that he made a strategic decision to refrain 
from any public statement before he attends the first bilateral 
talks with North Korea." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo observed: "There are fears that the 
(upcoming U.S.-North Korea) talks will not produce  tangible 
results, because North Korea wants a peace treaty to replace the 
armistice before it even thinks about returning to the Six-Party 
Talks." 
 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo editorialized: "If North Korea demands a peace 
treaty on the Korean Peninsula and improved relations with the U.S. 
as preconditions for returning to the Six-Party Talks and 
implementing the September 19 Joint Statement, the U.S. may respond 
in a flexible manner.  The U.S. may judge that a rigid attitude - 
offering rewards only when the North dismantles its nuclear weapons 
completely - will not bring any changes to North Korea, and seek the 
North's nuclear dismantlement through the normalization of bilateral 
ties. ... The ROKG should proactively prepare for any changes (on 
the Peninsula) which may occur due to improvements in U.S.-North 
Korea relations, rather than simply being wary of possible 
discussions on a peace treaty between the U.S. and North Korea." 
 
-Climate Change 
--------------- 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized today: "It is still unclear 
whether the 192-nation Copenhagen climate change conference will 
produce an agreement to replace the Kyoto Protocol.  However, even 
though the conference fails to work out a legally binding agreement, 
the prevailing opinion is that a new agreement will be coming in six 
months or a year because the international community must prepare 
for a situation after (the Kyoto Protocol expires in) 2012 by 
developing an agreement on climate change." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo, in a joint editorial with 56 
newspapers around the world, argued: "Few believe that Copenhagen 
can produce a fully polished treaty; real progress towards one could 
only begin with the arrival of President Obama in the White House 
and the reversal of years of U.S. obstructionism.  Even now the 
world finds itself at the mercy of American domestic politics, for 
the president cannot fully commit to the action required until the 
U.S. Congress has done so.  But the politicians in Copenhagen can 
and must agree on the essential elements of a fair and effective 
deal and, crucially, a firm timetable for turning it into a treaty. 
Next June's UN climate meeting in Bonn should be their deadline." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
(WE) SHOULD BE WELL PREPARED FOR SITUATION FOLLOWING BOSWORTH'S 
VISIT TO N. KOREA 
(Hankook Ilbo, December 7, Page 39) 
 
A five-member U.S. delegation led by U.S. Special Representative for 
North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth will visit North Korea tomorrow 
to hold bilateral talks with the North.  Bosworth's delegation, 
which arrived in the ROK yesterday, will fly to Pyongyang from Osan 
Air Base and stay until December 10.  He will have a meeting with 
Kang Sok-ju, the North's First Vice Foreign Minister and is expected 
to call on North Korea to return to the Six-Party Talks. 
 
The visit by Ambassador Bosworth as President Obama's special envoy 
to North Korea will serve as an important turning point in the North 
Korean nuclear issue.  His visit draws extraordinary attention since 
it marks the first official U.S.-North Korea talks during the Obama 
Administration.  The U.S. said that it will not engage in 
negotiations (with the North) but focus on urging the North to 
rejoin the Six-Party Talks and to implement the September 19 Joint 
Statement.  However, we take this with a grain of salt.  It is 
highly likely that both sides will extensively discuss how to make 
progress on the North Korean nuclear issue, improve bilateral 
relations and establish a security regime on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001925  003 OF 006 
 
 
 
There are both optimistic and pessimistic outlooks for the bilateral 
talks.  Some worry that the North may attempt to back away from the 
September 19 Joint Statement that calls on the North to abandon its 
nuclear programs in return for receiving a security guarantee and 
economic assistance, while demanding a peace treaty in order to be 
recognized as a nuclear state.  This will dampen the rare atmosphere 
of dialogue and lead to an escalation of conflict and confrontation 
between the two countries again. .  North Korea should not try to 
test the will of the other Six-Party countries and the international 
community.  The North will never be allowed to develop its nuclear 
programs. 
 
However, If North Korea demands a peace treaty on the Korean 
Peninsula and improved relations with the U.S. as preconditions for 
returning to the Six-Party Talks and implementing the September 19 
Joint Statement, the U.S. may respond in a flexible manner.  The 
U.S. may judge that a rigid attitude - offering rewards only when 
the North dismantles its nuclear weapons completely - will not bring 
any changes to North Korea, and seek the North's nuclear 
dismantlement through the normalization of bilateral ties.  A peace 
regime on the Korean Peninsula, which is stipulated in the September 
19 Joint Statement and the February 13 Agreement, should be 
discussed within the framework of the Six-Party Talks.  The ROKG 
should proactively prepare for any changes (on the Peninsula) which 
may occur due to improvements in U.S.-North Korea relations, rather 
than simply being wary of possible discussions on a peace treaty 
between the U.S. and North Korea. 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
U.S. ENVOY IN SEOUL BEFORE N. KOREA TRIP 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 7, 2009, Page 4) 
 
By Reporter Lim Min-hyuk 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth, 
who visits Pyongyang on Dec. 8-10, arrived in Seoul on Sunday for 
talks before he heads for the North. 
 
Bosworth arrived at Incheon International Airport but dodged 
reporters waiting at the arrivals terminal by getting into a car on 
the tarmac, which was arranged by the U.S. Embassy, and went to his 
quarters in downtown Seoul. 
 
An ROKG source said that the USG requested cooperation from the ROKG 
to minimize ROK media contact with Ambassador Bosworth. 
 
On the flight, Ambassador Bosworth happened to meet and talk with 
Grand National Party lawmaker Chung Mong-joon who was returning from 
his trip to South Africa.  However, Bosworth refrained from talking 
about his visit to North Korea, saying no one knows how the North 
will respond. 
 
Ambassador Bosworth will meet the chief ROK envoy to Six-Party 
denuclearization talks Wi Sung-lac on Monday to discuss the agenda 
of the Washington-Pyongyang talks, and will also meet Foreign 
Minister Yu Myung-hwan and Kim Sung-hwan, the Senior Presidential 
Secretary for Foreign Affairs and National Security. 
 
He flies to Pyongyang from the U.S. Air Base in Osan on Tuesday 
afternoon and there he will meet with First Vice Foreign Minister 
Kang Sok-ju and other officials. 
 
There are fears that the upcoming U.S.-North Korea talks will not 
produce tangible results, because North Korea wants a peace treaty 
to replace the armistice before it even thinks about returning to 
the Six-Party talks. 
 
(This is a translation prepared by the newspaper.  We have compared 
the English version on the website with the Korean version and added 
some sentences to make them identical.) 
 
 
SEOUL 00001925  004 OF 006 
 
 
 
CLOSE COVERAGE COMPLETELY BANNED FOR BOSWORTH'S ARRIVAL 
(Yonhap News, December 6, 2009) 
 
By Reporter Yu Hyun-min 
 
Ambassador Bosworth dodged reporters by moving straight out of the 
tarmac. 
 
On the afternoon of December 6, U.S. Special Representative for 
North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth arrived at Incheon International 
Airport to have consultations with the ROK before his December 8 
visit to the North.  However, he did not allow "close media 
coverage." 
 
After arriving at Incheon International Airport around 4 p.m. on a 
Korean Air flight from London, Ambassador Bosworth landed on the 
tarmac by going down the emergency stairs, which are installed at 
the boarding bridge linking an aircraft with an airport terminal, 
and left the airport in a black Ford passenger car arranged by the 
U.S. Embassy in Seoul. 
 
In order to avoid reporters, he did not enter the terminal but 
headed straight for a hotel in downtown Seoul. 
 
Therefore, 38 domestic and foreign reporters, who were staking out 
(the airport) were only able to see him going down the stairs and 
boarding the car through the (airport) window. 
 
This "ban on close coverage" was reportedly requested by the U.S. 
Department of State. 
 
An ROK Foreign Ministry official said, "At the request of the U.S. 
Embassy in Seoul, Ambassador Bosworth will not enter the airport 
terminal but move right from the tarmac to a hotel by car," adding, 
"It seems that he made a strategic decision to refrain from any 
public statement before he attends the bilateral talks with North 
Korea." 
 
Besides this, it was reported that the U.S. did not notify Foreign 
Ministry officials which hotel Ambassador Bosworth and his 
delegation would stay during their visit to Seoul. 
 
Another official noted, "The U.S. Embassy in Seoul did not inform us 
where Ambassador Bosworth is going to stay in downtown Seoul.  This 
is unusual, considering the customs so far." 
 
Ambassador Bosworth reportedly even plans to keep his schedule and 
movements in Seoul s-e-c-r-e-t, except the opening (photo spray) at 
a December 7 meeting with the ROK's chief nuclear envoy, Wi 
Sung-lac. 
 
In particular, according to sources, he will skip a "door step 
(photo opportunity and press availability in public)" after the 
meeting with Wi, and he has not yet determined when he will brief 
the media on his visit to the North after returning from Pyongyang 
(to Seoul). 
 
In this regard, some observers point out that even though Ambassador 
Bosworth's "media-averse" attitude can be seen as a strategic 
judgment on U.S.-North Korea bilateral dialogue, this is too much. 
 
In other words, while  media contact before his dialogue with the 
North could be burdensome, it is hardly understandable that he will 
not "expose" his movements, which draw local and global attention, 
without any clear explanation in advance. 
 
A diplomatic source said, "Although it could be a matter of personal 
style regarding the media, I cannot understand how he can think he 
is able to avoid contact with the media on such a significant issue. 
 I wonder if he would take the same attitude in a similar situation 
in the U.S." 
 
 
 
SEOUL 00001925  005 OF 006 
 
 
AFGHANISTAN STAYS COULD BE SHORTENED 
(JoongAng Daily, December 7, 2009) 
 
By Reporters Kang Joo-an and Seo Ji-eun 
 
The Defense Ministry is considering reversing the government's plan 
to extend the tour for troops dispatched to Afghanistan from the 
original one year to two and a half years, said sources with 
National Assembly. 
 
Reporting to the National Defense Committee of the National Assembly 
in a closed-door meeting last Friday, the ministry said, "We will 
submit a plan to the National Assembly around Friday to dispatch 340 
troops (to Afghanistan.) 
 
The dispatch period will be from July next year until December 2012, 
it said.  On Oct. 30, the ROKG announced it would send troops to 
protect civilian professionals working on reconstruction projects in 
the war-torn Central Asian country. 
 
However, opposition lawmakers and even some ruling Grand National 
Party members asked the ministry to review the period, claiming it 
is too long.  To date, military deployment has been made on a yearly 
basis and the period has been extended with approval from the 
National Assembly. 
 
"It's not appropriate for ROK troops to stay in Afghanistan when 
U.S. President Barack Obama announced plans to begin withdrawing the 
U.S. army beginning in July 2011," according to multiple sources who 
attended the meeting. Defense ministry officials answered that they 
"will review" the lawmakers' proposal. 
 
Separately, one source said some of the attendants said that UH-60 
Black Hawks are feared to be vulnerable to surface-to-air missile 
attacks.  The ministry said troops "should move in the helicopters 
due to the danger of improvised explosive devices." 
 
 
JAMES JONES SAYS U.S. WON'T LEAVE AFGHANISTAN IN 2011 
(Yonhap News, December 5, 2009) 
 
By Correspondent Seong Ki-hong 
 
U.S. National Security Advisor James Jones said on December 4 that 
the U.S. will not pull out its troops from Afghanistan in the near 
future and certainly not in 2011. 
 
During a press conference with foreign reporters on the U.S.'s 
strategy on the Afghan war, Jones said, "The U.S has no intention of 
leaving Afghanistan in the near future, certainly not in 2011" 
 
It seems that this remark is aimed at precluding concerns in the 
region - following President Obama's statement on withdrawal of U.S. 
troops from Afghanistan beginning in July 2011 - that the U.S. may 
completely pull out troops from the war-torn country by 2011. 
 
Johns said, "We are very confident that by the application of over 
100,000 U.S. troops and a significant increase in the (North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization) NATO and non-NATO contributing 
countries, we will be able to achieve the conditions by which 
Afghans will be able to take more responsibility for the conduct of 
their internal affairs."  He emphasized, "That will allow us to 
start bringing some of our troops home.  Of course that will have to 
be conditioned obviously on the situation on the ground." 
 
However, Jones noted, "But when you have a mission like this, it 
simply cannot be that it's just going to go on forever.  And the 
President has decided to focus everyone's attention on a reasonable 
time frame in which we can see real change." 
 
Meanwhile, the U.S. expressed its gratitude to the international 
community including NATO nations for deciding to deploy an 
additional 7,000 troops in line with President Obama's plan to 
infuse more troops in Afghanistan.  The U.S. also added that it 
 
SEOUL 00001925  006 OF 006 
 
 
expects additional military contributions in the near future. 
 
White House Spokesman Robert Gibbs said, "I think 7,000 additional 
NATO troops is a hefty contribution on their part," adding, "That is 
obviously a very, very positive development." 
 
In a regular briefing, State Department Spokesman Ian Kelly said, 
"NATO and (the International Security Assistance Force) ISAF - and 
their ISAF partners pledged to contribute about 7,000 more troops, 
and we expect that there will be several thousand more likely in the 
near future." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>