^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1687  |  2009-10-23  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 23일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001687

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=83710&page=59&total=2313|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 23일]]
번역자:PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/18 12:02//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
길 잃은 '外高 정책'

중앙일보, 모든 텔레비전
[[http://news.joins.com/article/3838758http://news.joins.com/article/3838758|남북 싱가포르서 비밀 접촉]]

동아일보
탈북 81세 국군포로 中공안 두달째 억류

한국일보, 세계일보, 서울신문
한미안보협의회/ 金국방 “北모든상황에 대비 계획·협력 강화”

한겨레 신문
국세청·검찰, 효성3세 국외부동산 조사/국세청 조사관 곧 미국 파견

===== 국내 동향 =====

김태영 국방장관과 로버트 게이츠 미국 국방장관은 22일 서울에서 제41차 한미안보협의회(SCM)를 마치고 16개항의 SCM 공동성명을 채택했다. 공동성명은 북한의 군사 위협에 맞서 한국을 방어한다는 미국의 지속적인 공약을 확인하였다. (전체)

게이츠 국방장관은 아프가니스탄 원조를 직접적으로 요청하지 않았다. 다만 공동 기자회견에서 이렇게 말했다: “지원을 희망하는 국가가 무엇을 얼마나 기여할지 준비 중이라면 환영하지만, 전적으로 한국 정부가 결정할 사안이다."

핵심 한국 당국자는 정부 인사는 아니지만 유명 인사가 김양건 북한 통일전선부장과 싱가포르에서 회동하여 남북 정상회담 가능성을 논의한 것이 분명하다. (전체)

한국 정부는 지난 4월 북한의 장거리 로켓 발사 이후 중단시킨 북한산 모래 반입을 다시 허용하는 방안을 검토 중이다. (조선, 한겨레, 세계) 북한 군부(軍部)의 '현금줄'이란 의심을 받고 있어 이러한 정부의 허용 움직임은 논란이 예상된다. ([[http://nk.chosun.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=120565|조선]])

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 한미 안보협의회의 ====

모든 언론은 22일 열린 한미 연례안보협의회의를 다뤘다. 회의 내용을 보면 미국은 위기 발생시 한국 국방을 증강하기 위한 군사력과 지구적으로 가용한 미국 병력을 동원하기로 약속했다. 미국은 또 북한군의 위협에 대처하기 위해 핵우산과 재래식 타격 능력, 미사일방어(MD) 능력 등 ‘모든 범위’의 확장 억지력(extended deterrence)을 제공하기로 분명히 밝혔다고 언론은 전했다.

대다수 언론은 이러한 상황 전개는 한반도에 비상 사태의 경우에 전세계에 깔린 미국의 영토와 일본 중심의 병력으로부터 미국의 증원을 확대하고 있으므로 대단히 의미심장하다고 관측했다.

아프가니스탄 전선과 관련해 모든 언론은 로버트 게이츠 국방장관이 아프가니스탄 원조를 직접 요청하지 않았다고 보도했다. 다만 공동 기자회견에서 이렇게 말했다고 전했다. “지원을 희망하는 국가가 무엇을 얼마나 기여할지 준비 중이라면 환영하지만, 전적으로 한국 정부가 결정할 사안이다."

보수 조선일보 사설: "지금 한반도 평화의 최대 위협 요인은 북핵이다. 앞으로 북핵 문제는 지지부진한 협상 속에 북핵 보유가 점차 기정사실화되는 방향으로 가든지, 아니면 북한이 핵을 포기하는 대가로 한반도의 정전(停戰)체제에 근본적인 수정을 가하는 두 길 가운데 어느 한 길로 접어들 가능성이 높다. 북핵 보유가 기정사실화돼 갈 경우에 미국의 선언적인 확장억지력만으로 대한민국의 정치·군사·경제·심리적 안보가 충족될 수 있겠느냐는 의문은 지워지지 않을 것이다."

보수 동아일보의 사설 주장: "미국의 방위공약은 굳건한 한미동맹을 대전제로 한다. 정권에 따라 동맹 의지가 약해지기라도 하면 방위공약만 믿고 안심할 수 없는 상황을 맞을 수 있다. 우리가 2012년의 한미연합사 해체와 전시작전통제권 조기 전환을 우려하는 이유다. 다국적군이 연합작전과 지휘권 통일 없이 전쟁에서 승리한 전례가 거의 없다. 6·25 남침 격퇴는 유엔군사령관의 작전지휘권에 의한 연합작전의 성공 사례로 꼽힌다."

중도 한국일보 사설: "정부가 아프가니스탄에서 활동하는 민간재건팀 보호를 위해 300명 규모의 '보호병력'파견을 검토하고 있다고 한다. …민간지원팀 보호에는 의료ㆍ공병부대 파병 때보다 강력한 전투병력이 필요하다. 경찰은 부적절하다. '용병'파병을 거론하는 것은 감당할 수 없는 논란을 자초하는 것이다. 막연히 한미 동맹을 내세울 게 아니다. 여론을 설득할 수 있는 대안을 먼저 고려해야 한다."

==== 북한 ====

모든 한국 언론은 지난 주 정부 인사는 아니지만 유명 인사가 김양건 북한 통일전선부장과 싱가포르에서 비밀 접촉하여 남북 정상회담 가능성을 논의한 것이 분명하다고 핵심 한국 당국자가 밝혔다고 보도했다.

특히 보수 [[http://blog.daum.net/_blog/BlogTypeView.do?blogid=0NmOY&articleno=3394|조선일보]]는 여권의 핵심 관계자도 "북한이 이명박 대통령의 입장을 대변할 수 있는 인사와의 만남을 오래전부터 요청해 왔으며, 최근 성사단계에 있었던 것이 사실"이라며 "그러나 최근 남북접촉 사실이 언론에 계속 공개되면서 남북간 고위접촉은 당분간 어려워질 전망"이라고 전했다.

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://news.donga.com/List/Politics/3/00/20091023/23629152/2|[사설]김태영-게이츠 합의 뒤에 남는 불안]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 23일, 39면)

미국은 한국이 북한의 핵 공격을 받는다면 핵우산과 재래식 타격능력, 미사일방어(MD) 체제를 총동원해 응징할 것을 다짐했다. 유사시에는 전 세계에 파견된 미군 전투력을 유연하게 한반도에 증강 배치하기로 했다. 김태영, 로버트 게이츠 한미 국방장관은 그제 양국 합참의장의 군사위원회(MCM) 논의 결과를 토대로 어제 연례안보협의회(SCM) 회담에서 북핵 대책을 골자로 한 16개 항의 공동성명을 채택했다. 강력한 방위공약을 담은 공동성명은 북이 핵을 포기하도록 압박하는 효과도 있다. 

게이츠 장관은 미국 영토가 핵 공격을 받는 경우와 같은 수준의 확장억지력(extended deterrence)을 한국에 제공한다는 점을 재확인하고 구체적 타격 수단까지 명시했다. 여기에는 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM), 잠수함발사미사일(SLBM), 전략폭격기도 포함된다. 월터 샤프 주한미군사령관은 6월 26일 육군사관학교 특강에서 확장억지력에 MD 체제가 포함돼 있음을 밝힌 바 있다. 확장억지 개념은 2006년 SCM 공동성명에 처음 들어간 뒤 올해 6월 한미 정상회담 때 ‘한미동맹 미래비전’에 명문화됐다. 미 영토 및 주일미군 위주의 한반도 증원(增援)계획을 전 세계의 미군 전투력으로 넓힌 것도 의미가 크다.

그러나 한미연합사 해체 및 전시작전통제권 전환(한국군 단독 행사)에 대해서는 ‘2012년 4월 17일’이라는 기존 일정을 고수해 안보 불안감을 깨끗이 씻어주지 못했다. 양국 장관은 추진 상황을 주기적으로 평가 점검하기로 해 실낱같은 연기 가능성을 남겨두는 데 그쳤다. 게이츠 장관은 “한국이 완전한 자주방위 역량을 갖출 때까지 미국이 보완전력을 계속 제공한다”고 약속했을 뿐이다. 현재의 주한미군 병력 2만8000명 수준을 유지하고 한국 근무를 3년으로 늘린 것은 그나마 다행이다.

미국의 방위공약은 굳건한 한미동맹을 대전제로 한다. 정권에 따라 동맹 의지가 약해지기라도 하면 방위공약만 믿고 안심할 수 없는 상황을 맞을 수 있다. 우리가 2012년의 한미연합사 해체와 전시작전통제권 조기 전환을 우려하는 이유다. 다국적군이 연합작전과 지휘권 통일 없이 전쟁에서 승리한 전례가 거의 없다. 6·25 남침 격퇴는 유엔군사령관의 작전지휘권에 의한 연합작전의 성공 사례로 꼽힌다.

동맹 강화를 위해서는 게이츠 장관이 간접적으로 요망했듯이 아프가니스탄 같은 전쟁지역에서의 협력도 좋은 기회가 될 수 있다. 미군기지 평택이전 등 미군의 안정적 주둔 여건을 마련하는 사업도 적극 도울 필요가 있다. 6월 한미 정상회담에서 합의한 국가 안보와 글로벌 안보를 함께 생각하는 ‘포괄적 전략동맹’에 깊은 관심을 가져야 할 때다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/opinion/editorial/383427.html|[사설]아프간 지원, 비군사 분야에 한정해 신중하게]]**(한겨레신문, 2009년 10월 23일, 31면)

김태영 국방장관과 로버트 게이츠 미국 국방장관은 어제 서울에서 제41차 한-미 안보협의회(SCM)를 열고, 미국의 강력한 대한반도 안보 우산 제공과 한국의 세계 안보 기여를 내용으로 하는 공동성명을 발표했다. 크게 보아, 미국이 북한의 핵·미사일 전력 증강에 따른 우리 쪽의 안보 불안을 불식시켜 주는 대신, 우리는 미국이 곤경에 처해 있는 아프간에서의 기여를 확대하기로 했다고 볼 수 있다.

성명은 “평화유지활동, 안정화 및 재건 지원, 인도적 지원 및 재난 구조를 포함해 광범위한 범세계적 안보 도전에 대처하기 위해 긴밀한 협력을 증진해 나가기로 합의했다”면서도, 아프간이라는 단어는 전혀 쓰지 않았다. 게이츠 장관도 “미국 쪽은 아프간 지원과 관련해 한국 정부에 구체적인 제안을 한 적이 없다”, “한국이 언제 어느 정도 지원할지는 전적으로 한국 정부에 달렸다”고 말했다. 하지만 말이 그렇다는 것이지, 미국 쪽이 파병을 포함한 다양한 분야에서 우리의 협력을 강력하게 바라고 있다는 것은 공공연한 비밀이다. 게이츠 장관이 전날 한미연합사 장병을 대상으로 한 연설에서 “글로벌 안보 차원에서 군사적 기여는 한국의 안보와 핵심적인 국익에도 도움이 된다”고 에둘러 말한 건 상징적이다.

이제 공은 우리 정부 손으로 넘어왔다. 지난 5월 아프간 바그람 미 공군기지 병원 신축, 민간재건팀(PRT) 증원, 경제 지원 등은 이미 약속한 만큼, 군사 지원까지 확대할 것인가가 최대의 관심사다. 그러나 전투병을 포함한 군사 지원은 아프간 전쟁 자체가 애초 9·11 테러에 대한 미국의 보복전쟁으로 정당성이 부족하다는 점, 미국도 현재 증파 문제를 결정하지 못하고 있는 점, 2007년 여름 선교봉사단의 집단 피랍 사건 이후 전 국민적 충격 속에 파견되었던 의료·공병부대마저 전원 철수한 점을 고려할 때, 절대 받아들일 수 없다.

다만, 비군사적 분야라면 국제적 위상과 경제력에 맞는 기여를 적극 고려할 만하다. 특히, 전쟁으로 피폐해진 아프간의 재건과 부흥을 돕는 데 주력할 필요가 있다. 하지만 이것도, 최근의 아프간 정정이 한 치 앞을 내다보기 어려울 정도로 혼미하고, 미국도 아프간 사태를 어떻게 풀어갈 것인지 청사진을 내놓지 못하고 있는 점을 고려해 신중한 자세가 요구된다. 발 빠른 게 능사는 아니다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/22/2009102201726.html|[사설] 미국의 절대적 한국 방위 의지에도 뭔가 허전한 이유]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 23일, 39면)

한·미 국방장관은 22일 서울에서 열린 연례 안보협의회에서 처음으로 북핵에 대한 '확장억지력'의 구체적 수단을 공동성명에 명문화했다. 미국은 앞으로 핵우산뿐만 아니라 재래식 타격 능력과 미사일방어(MD)를 혼합해 북핵에 대응한다는 것이다. 미국은 여기에 더해 "한반도 위기 시 세계 전역에서 동원 가능한 미군 병력과 능력을 한미 연합 방위를 위해 전략적으로 유연하게 증강 배치할 것"이라고도 했다.

한미상호방위조약에 따른 미군의 전시 증원 전력은 주로 미 본토와 주일 미군 중심이었으나 이를 전 세계의 미군으로 확대한다는 의미다. 전시작전권 전환으로 미군의 전시 증원이 원활하지 못할 것이란 우려가 적지 않은 상황에서 미국이 한국 안보와 한미안보조약 이행에 대한 의지를 보다 더 분명히 한 것으로 평가할 수 있다. 양국은 공동성명에서 한국의 아프가니스탄전 지원에 대한 구체적 표현을 피함으로써 이 문제는 한국측 결정에 맡기기로 했다.

공동성명의 16개항 전체 어디에도 미국의 한국 방위 의지를 의심할 만한 대목은 없다. 그러나 이 강력한 안보 문서를 앞에 놓고서도 무언가 허전한 느낌을 가질 수밖에 없는 것이 오늘의 한반도 현실이다.

지금 한반도 평화의 최대 위협 요인은 북핵이다. 앞으로 북핵 문제는 지지부진한 협상 속에 북핵 보유가 점차 기정사실화되는 방향으로 가든지, 아니면 북한이 핵을 포기하는 대가로 한반도의 정전(停戰)체제에 근본적인 수정을 가하는 두 길 가운데 어느 한 길로 접어들 가능성이 높다. 북핵 보유가 기정사실화돼 갈 경우에 미국의 선언적인 확장억지력만으로 대한민국의 정치·군사·경제·심리적 안보가 충족될 수 있겠느냐는 의문은 지워지지 않을 것이다. 북한의 핵포기를 유도하기 위해 한반도 정전체제를 변경할 경우에도 우리는 대한민국 출범 이래 최대의 안보적 격변을 피하기 어렵다.

이런 상황에서 양국 국방장관이 다시 한번 전시작전권 전환 시기를 2012년 4월 17일로 못박았다. 게이츠 미 국방장관은 이를 "역사적 변화"라고까지 했다. 북핵만 없다면 그럴 수 있을 것이다. 양국은 앞으로 군사적 준비 상황을 전작권 전환 시기에 반영한다고 했다. 하지만 지금은 군사 기술적 측면만이 아니라 정치·외교·경제·심리적 요인까지를 고려한 종합적이고 전략적인 판단이 요구되는 상황이다.

북한이 만에 하나 핵을 버리는 전략적 결단을 내린다면 그 대가로 한·미동맹 해체와 주한미군 철수를 요구할 것이 분명하다. 그것이 대한민국의 급소라고 판단하고 있기 때문이다. 이 상황에서 미국은 북핵 제거와 주한미군 철수를 포함한 한미동맹의 수정을 양쪽에 놓고 미국의 국익을 저울질하게 될 것이다.

그 결과를 지금 예상하기는 어렵다. 그때 가장 중요한 것은 한·미가 정말 흉금을 터놓고 앞으로 10년 후, 20년 후를 내다보면서 한미동맹의 앞날을 논의하는 것이다. 그것이 한반도 평화체제 나아가 한국과 북한이 미국·중국·일본·러시아와 엮어갈 동북아 평화체제의 밑그림이 되어야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

[사설] 아프간 '보호병력 파견' 명분 허술하다(한국일보, 2009년 10월 23일, 39면)

정부가 아프가니스탄에서 활동하는 민간재건팀 보호를 위해 300명 규모의 '보호병력'파견을 검토하고 있다고 한다. 22일 열린 한미 연례안보협의회를 앞두고 오가던 파병 논란의 가닥이 잡힌 듯하다. 어떤 명목으로든 병력을 파견하되, 전투 목적이 아니라고 포장할 생각인 모양이다. 그러나 그런 식으로 파병 명분을 확보하고 여론을 설득할 수 있을지 의문이다. 허술하다는 느낌이 앞선다.

먼저 2001년부터 동의ㆍ다산 부대를 차례로 파병했다가 2007년 인질 사태를 겪은 뒤 서둘러 철군한 사실을 기억해야 한다. 동의ㆍ다산 부대는 의료지원단 및 공병과 소규모 경계병력으로 구성돼 전투부대 파병은 아니었다. 그러나 우리 국민 20여명을 인질로 잡은 탈레반 저항세력의 철군 요구와 여론 악화에 파병 명분을 돌볼 겨를이 없었다.

그 뒤 정부는 재파병 불가 입장을 유지했다. 우리도 재건활동 지원과 경찰훈련요원 파견을 넘어선 파병은 무모한 선택이라고 거듭 지적했다. 한미 양국 정부가 바뀌었다고 달리 판단할 이유는 없다.

아프간 정세는 한층 나빠져 전쟁을 주도하는 미국에서조차 철군 여론이 우세한 형편이다.

오바마 행정부가 이라크 철수를 서두르면서 아프간 정세 안정에 집중하는 것은 이 때문이다. 특히 미국과 나토 주축의 국제안보지원군(ISAF) 유지가 긴요하다. 현재 300명 이상을 파병한 19개국의 상당수가 대열에서 이탈할 조짐이다. 정부가 재건지원팀을 300명으로 늘리고 보호병력 300명을 파견한다는 구상이 어디서 비롯됐는지 짐작하게 한다.

게이츠 미 국방장관은 안보협의회 공동선언 등에서 우리의 평화유지활동 기여를 늘릴 것을 강조했다. 그러나 이를 무작정 '파병 불가피'쪽으로 끌고 가는 것은 어설프다. 민간지원팀 보호에는 의료ㆍ공병부대 파병 때보다 강력한 전투병력이 필요하다. 경찰은 부적절하다. '용병'파병을 거론하는 것은 감당할 수 없는 논란을 자초하는 것이다. 막연히 한미 동맹을 내세울 게 아니다. 여론을 설득할 수 있는 대안을 먼저 고려해야 한다.

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3838602|[사설] 전작권 전환 2012년 4월은 너무 빠르다]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 23일, 46면: 발췌)

한·미 국방장관은 어제 열린 한·미안보협의회(SCM) 뒤 발표한 공동성명에서 한미연합사령관의 전시작전통제권(전작권)을 2012년 4월 17일 한국군에 이관한다는 일정을 재차 확인했다. 전작권 전환 자체를 우려하거나 전환 시기가 너무 빠르다며 반대하는 여론이 비등한 것을 의식한 내용이다. 그러나 이번 합의에도 불구하고 논란은 가라앉지 않을 것이 확실하다. 우리 군의 현대화 진행 속도, 경제상황, 북한 핵 문제 등 한반도 안보 여건을 종합 평가할 때 예정대로 전작권 전환이 이뤄질 경우 한반도 안보에 중대한 구멍이 생길 가능성이 크기 때문이다. 김태영 국방부 장관도 이달 초 국회에서 “한미연합사령부가 존치되는 게 가장 바람직하지만 국가 간 약속이라서 (해체에) 대비할 수밖에 없다”고 말했다.

올해 국방부 국정감사에서는 우리의 국방 태세와 관련해 여러 가지 문제점이 지적됐다. …이번 공동성명에서 로버트 게이츠 미 국방장관은 전작권 전환 이후에도 한국이 자주 방위 역량을 갖출 때까지 보완 전력을 제공키로 약속했다. 북한 핵에 대비한 이른바 ‘확장 억지’를 핵우산, 재래식 타격 능력, 미사일 방어 능력 등으로 구체화한 것이 주요 줄거리다. 이 약속은 바로 전작권 전환 이후 한국군 전력의 허점에 대한 우려를 의식한 것이다.

2006년 전작권 전환에 합의하기까지 수년 동안 한·미는 북한 핵 문제 등 외교안보상 여러 사안을 놓고 대립하고 있었다. 특히 취임 초부터 ‘자주 국방’을 강조하며 미국에 전작권 이관을 요구한 노무현 전 대통령의 행보는 지나치게 이상주의적이었다. 그러나 당시의 요구는 마침 해·공군 중심으로 미군 전체의 기동력을 강화하는 방향으로 군 구조를 개편하기 시작한 미 정부의 이해와 맞아떨어졌다. 결국 한국군의 중장기적 능력에 대한 객관적 평가보다는 한국 정부에 대한 일시적 불만과 미군의 전략 변화가 전작권 전환 합의의 가장 큰 동인(動因)이었던 것이다.

경위가 어떻든 이미 여러 해 진행된 전작권 전환 작업을 당장 중단할 순 없는 상황이다. 또 충분한 자주 국방 능력을 갖추기 위해 우리 스스로 최대한 노력해야 한다는 것도 자명한 일이다. 그러나 전작권 전환과 맞물려 수립한 우리 군의 ‘국방개혁 2020’안은 벌써부터 여러 분야에서 차질을 빚고 있다. 더욱이 2012년 4월까지 이런 문제들을 해결할 마땅한 방법을 찾기 어려운 상황이다. 그렇다면 별수 없다. 우리 군의 전투력 강화 작업을 가속화하는 동시에 미국과 전작권 전환 문제를 재협상해 그 시기를 늦춰야 한다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
==== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1687.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001687 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 23, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Policy Adrift on Foreign Language High Schools 
 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, All TVs 
Two Koreas S-e-c-r-e-t-l-y Met in Singapore to Discuss Possible 
Summit 
 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
81-Year-Old ROK POW Detained in China for Two Consecutive Months 
after Fleeing N. Korea 
 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
U.S. to Mobilize Full Range of Military Capabilities in Event of 
Emergency on Korean Peninsula 
 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Three Sons of Hyosung Group Chairman Probed over Purchasing Overseas 
Real Estate 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
ROK Defense Minister Kim Tae-young and U.S. Defense Secretary Robert 
Gates adopted a 16-point joint statement following the 41st Security 
Consultative Meeting (SCM) in Seoul yesterday. The statement 
confirmed a continuing U.S. commitment to defend the ROK against 
North Korea's military threats. (All) 
 
Secretary Gates made no direct request for aid to Afghanistan, only 
saying in a joint press conference: "We obviously welcome any 
contribution that any countries around the world are prepared to 
make, but that decision - what and how much to contribute - is 
entirely up to the ROK." (All) 
 
According to a key ROKG official, a high-profile, nongovernmental 
ROK figure met in Singapore last week with Kim Yang-gon, Director of 
the United Front Department at North Korea's Workers' Party, 
apparently to discuss a possible summit between the two Koreas. 
(All) 
 
The ROKG is considering resuming imports of sand from North Korea, 
which have been suspended since April, when the North test-fired a 
long-range rocket. (Chosun, Hankyoreh, Segye) This move is likely to 
create a stir, given that there has been suspicion that payments for 
sand shipments may have been pocketed by military authorities in the 
North. (Chosun) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
- ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) 
--------------------------------------------- - 
All media covered yesterday's annual ROK-U.S. Security Consultative 
Meeting, in which the U.S. pledged to mobilize globally available 
U.S. forces and military capabilities to augment the ROK's defense 
in case of crisis.  According to media reports, the U.S. also made 
it clear that it will provide "extended deterrence," using the full 
range of military capabilities, including the nuclear umbrella, 
conventional strike and missile defense capabilities, in order to 
deal with North Korea's military threats. 
 
Most media observed that this development carries great significance 
 
SEOUL 00001687  002 OF 007 
 
 
since it has expanded U.S. reinforcements from American territory 
and Japan-centered forces to U.S forces across the world in the 
event of an emergency on the Korea Peninsula. 
 
On the Afghanistan front, all media reported that Defense Secretary 
Robert Gates made no direct request for aid to Afghanistan, quoting 
him as only saying in a joint press conference: "We obviously 
welcome any contribution that any countries around the world are 
prepared to make, but that decision - what and how much to 
contribute- is entirely up to the ROK." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "The greatest threat to 
peace on the Korean Peninsula is North Korea's nuclear program. 
There is a high possibility that the North Korean nuclear issue may 
be settled in the following two ways: accepting a nuclear-armed 
North Korea or making a fundamental change to the current armistice 
on the Korean Peninsula in return for the North's abandonment of 
nuclear weapons.  Should the North's nuclear possession become an 
established fact, we wonder if the U.S.'s stated 'extended 
deterrence' alone could satisfy the ROK's political, military, 
economic and psychological security (needs)." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo argued in an editorial: "The defense 
agreement with the U.S. is based on a solid bilateral alliance.  If 
the alliance weakens, the agreement cannot ensure a feeling of 
safety.  This is why we are worried about disbanding the ROK-U.S. 
Combined Forces Command (CFC) and transferring wartime operational 
control in 2012.  Few multinational forces have won in war without a 
unifying command.  Joint operation under the leadership of the U.S. 
military helped prevent North Korea from taking the ROK." 
 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo observed: "The ROKG is reportedly considering 
sending a 300-strong force to Afghanistan to protect the civilian 
Provincial Reconstruction Team there. ... In order to protect the 
civilian team, however, combat troops, who are stronger than the 
units of military medics or engineers, are needed.  Police officers 
are not appropriate.  Talking about sending mercenaries will also 
only invite uncontrollable controversy.  Rather than vaguely citing 
the ROK-U.S. alliance as a reason for troop deployment, the ROKG 
should first come up with alternatives which can win public 
approval." 
 
- N. Korea 
---------- 
Citing a key ROKG official, all ROK media reported that there was a 
s-e-c-r-e-t contact in Singapore last week between a high-profile, 
nongovernmental ROK figure and Kim Yang-gon, Director of the United 
Front Department at North Korea's Workers' Party, apparently to 
discuss a possible summit between the two Koreas. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo, in particular, quoted a key ruling camp 
official as saying: "North Korea has long requested a meeting with a 
person who can speak on behalf of President Lee Myung-bak, and it is 
true that such a meeting was recently on the verge of happening. 
Since news of the meeting was made public, however, it will be 
difficult to hold meetings of senior officials from both Koreas for 
some time." 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
 
JITTERS OVER DEFENSE ACCORD WITH U.S. 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 23, 2009, page 39) 
 
The United States yesterday reaffirmed its unwavering commitment to 
extended deterrence by using the full range of its military 
capabilities, including a nuclear umbrella, if North Korea attempts 
a nuclear attack on the ROK.  In times of emergency, Washington will 
flexibly increase and relocate its forces across the world to the 
Korean Peninsula.  U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Korean 
counterpart Kim Tae-young adopted a 16-point joint communiqu on 
North Korea's nuclear program at the Security Consultative Meeting 
yesterday, which was based on talks of the two countries joint 
 
SEOUL 00001687  003 OF 007 
 
 
chiefs of staff Wednesday.  The joint statement can pressure North 
Korea to abandon nuclear weapons. 
 
Secretary Gates reaffirmed Washington's extended deterrence to 
Seoul, saying a nuclear attack on the ROK will be considered one on 
U.S. soil.  He clarified specific means like intercontinental 
ballistic and submarine-launched ballistic missiles and strategic 
bombers.  Gen. Walter Sharp, the commander of U.S. forces in Korea, 
said June 26 in a lecture at the Korea Military Academy that the 
extended deterrence includes missile defense. The concept of 
extended deterrence was specified in the "Future Vision of the 
Korea-U.S. Alliance" at the June bilateral summit after being 
included first in the Security Consultative Meeting's joint 
communiqu in 2006.  The joint agreement is also meaningful since it 
includes the expansion of U.S. forces to include U.S. forces across 
the world as well as forces from American territory and 
Japan-centered forces in case of emergency on the Korea Peninsula. 
 
The decision, however, failed to dispel insecurity since the plans 
to disband the Combined Forces Command and transfer wartime 
operational control back to Seoul in 2012 remain unchanged.  The two 
defense ministers will check progress on a regular basis, leaving a 
silver lining of hope.  Gates promised that Washington will keep 
providing complementary forces until Seoul can defend itself on its 
own.  Fortunately, the U.S. will maintain its 28,000-strong forces 
in Korea and extend their stay here to three years. 
 
The defense agreement with the U.S. is based on a solid bilateral 
alliance.  If the alliance weakens, the agreement cannot ensure a 
feeling of safety.  This is why we are worried about disbanding the 
ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command (CFC) and transferring wartime 
operational control in 2012.  Few multinational forces have won in 
war without a unifying command.  Joint operation under the 
leadership of the U.S. military helped prevent North Korea from 
taking the ROK. 
 
As Secretary Gates indirectly requested, cooperation in war zones 
such as Afghanistan could be a good opportunity to strengthen 
alliances.  The ROK needs to create a good environment for U.S. 
forces in Korea, such as assisting in the relocation of the main 
U.S. base to Pyeongtaek, Gyeonggi Province.  Now is the time to show 
great interest in the comprehensive strategic alliance with national 
and global security in mind, something that was agreed on at the 
bilateral summit in June. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
AFGHANISTAN SUPPORT REQUIRES CAREFUL CONSIDERATION 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, October 23, 2009, page 31) 
 
Defense Minister Kim Tae-young and U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert 
Gates convened yesterday in Seoul for the 41st Republic of 
Korea-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) and issued a joint 
communiqu, the core of which dealt with the U.S.'s dedication to 
providing a firm security umbrella for the Korean Peninsula, and the 
ROK's contribution to global security.  Broadly speaking, in return 
for the U.S. assistance in decreasing the ROK's security concerns 
resulting from North Korea's strengthened nuclear and missile 
forces, the ROK decided to agree to expand its contribution in 
Afghanistan if the situation arises where the U.S. finds itself in a 
difficult position. 
 
The statement shows that the two countries are in agreement on 
promoting close cooperation in handling wide-ranging global security 
challenges, including peacekeeping, stabilization, reconstruction 
support, humanitarian aid and disaster relief.  Nowhere was the word 
"Afghanistan" used.  During his press conference, Gates said the 
U.S. has not made any concrete requests to the ROKG for support in 
Afghanistan, and that the timeline and extent of ROK support is 
entirely up to the ROKG.  This was merely his statement; however, it 
is a widely known s-e-c-r-e-t that the U.S. is strongly hoping for 
ROK cooperation in a number of areas, including troop deployment.  A 
 
SEOUL 00001687  004 OF 007 
 
 
speech Gates gave to the men and women of the ROK-U.S. Combined 
Forces Command provided evidence of this sentiment, when he said 
that military contributions to global security are also in the ROK's 
core interest. 
 
The ball is now our government's court.  Since our government has 
already promised to construct a new hospital at Bagram Air Base, and 
to increase personnel for Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) and 
provide economic support, it is a matter of great interest as to 
whether our government will expand aid to include military support. 
Military support including combat troops, however, is something we 
can never accept, in consideration of the facts that the Afghanistan 
War, as a war which began out of U.S. revenge for the 9.11 terrorist 
attacks, lacks appropriate justification, that the U.S. is also 
currently undecided about whether to boost its troop presence, and 
that the ROKG has already pulled out medical and engineering units 
amidst public shock following the mass-kidnapping of a missionary 
service group in the summer of 2007. 
 
It is worth actively considering whether contributing non-military 
support is in accordance with our international prestige and 
economic power.  In particular, there is a need to focus support on 
the reconstruction and rebuilding efforts in Afghanistan, a country 
which has been impoverished due to war.  However, because the 
current political situation in Afghanistan is so murky and the U.S. 
has also been unable to present a blueprint for resolving the 
situation in Afghanistan, a careful posture is critical.  A quick 
response would not be a competent response. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
ARE SEOUL AND WASHINGTON BEING COMPLETELY FRANK? 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 23, 2009, page 39) 
 
The ROK and U.S. defense chiefs held their annual Security 
Consultative Meeting on Thursday in Seoul and stipulated in a joint 
statement specific steps to provide the ROK with "extended 
deterrence" against the North Korean nuclear threat.  It was the 
first time specific measures were put on paper.  The U.S. will 
provide the ROK with a nuclear umbrella, conventional strike and 
missile capabilities.  In addition, Gates said the U.S. will deploy 
any American troops that can be mobilized from around the world in 
the event of a crisis on the Korean peninsula. 
 
According to a bilateral defense treaty, the mobilization of 
additional American troops was to come from soldiers based in the 
U.S. mainland and Japan.  But Washington has now pledged to expand 
that to American troops stationed around the world.  At a time when 
concerns are increasing over a potential shortage of U.S. troops 
after the transfer of full control of Korean troops to Seoul, the 
agreement demonstrates Washington's resolve to uphold its pledge to 
defend the ROK.  The joint communiqu avoids any mention of the 
ROK's support for military operations in Afghanistan, leaving it up 
to Seoul to decide. 
 
None of the 16 clauses of the joint statement leave any room to 
doubt Washington's commitment to the ROK's defense.  But even with 
the signing of such a powerful agreement, a feeling of unease 
lingers. 
 
The greatest threat to peace on the Korean Peninsula is North 
Korea's nuclear program.  There is a high possibility that the North 
Korean nuclear issue may be settled in the following two ways: 
accepting a nuclear-armed North Korea or making a fundamental change 
to the current armistice on the Korean Peninsula in return for the 
North's abandonment of nuclear weapons.  Should the North's nuclear 
possession become an established fact, we wonder if the U.S.'s 
stated 'extended deterrence' alone could satisfy the ROK's 
political, military, economic and psychological security (needs). 
If the armistice is turned into a proper peace treaty, the ROK will 
face the greatest upheaval in national security in its history 
because it would probably mean an end to the U.S. Forces Korea. 
 
SEOUL 00001687  005 OF 007 
 
 
 
It is in these circumstances that the allies once again stipulated 
that the transfer of full troop control will take place as planned 
on April 17, 2012.  Gates even referred to this as a "historic 
change."  If the North Korean nuclear threat did not exist, this 
would be fine.  The two countries said they would time their 
military preparations to the period of the handover.  But as the 
situation stands, a strategic decision is needed requiring 
political, diplomatic, economic and psychological factors to be 
considered, in addition to military and technical ones. 
 
If North Korea makes the strategic decision to scrap its nuclear 
program, it will inevitably demand the withdrawal of U.S. troops 
from the Korean Peninsula.  It knows that this is the ROK's greatest 
weakness.  And at that point, Washington will have to balance 
whether it has more to gain from North Korea giving up its nukes or 
from revising its alliance with the ROK. 
 
Washington's decision is difficult to predict.  The most important 
factor when the time comes will be whether Seoul and Washington were 
able to hold frank discussions about the future of their alliance 10 
or 20 years down the road.  This should serve as the framework not 
only for peace on the Korean peninsula, but for peace in Northeast 
Asia involving the U.S., China, Japan and Russia. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
 
ROKG JUSTIFICATION FOR SENDING TROOPS TO AFGHANISTAN TO GUARD 
CIVILIANS THERE IS Unconvincing 
(Hankook Ilbo, October 23, 2009, Page39) 
 
The ROKG is reportedly considering sending a 300-strong force to 
Afghanistan to protect the civilian Provincial Reconstruction Team 
(PRT) there.  Debate on the troop dispatch, which was heated ahead 
of the ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) on October 22, 
now appears to have ended in a conclusion (that ROKG will consider 
sending troops.)   It appears that the ROKG intends to send troops 
(to Afghanistan) for whatever reason and then give the excuse that 
they are not for combat purposes.  However, it is doubtful whether 
this kind of justification may sound persuasive enough to convince 
people to agree to the troop dispatch.  The government's efforts 
seem to be clumsy. 
 
We should first remember that we had started to send the Dongui 
Medical Unit and the Dasan Engineering Unit to the region in 2001 
but, after the kidnapping incident in 2007, rushed to pull out the 
troops.  The two units were composed of a small number of non-combat 
troops.  However, faced with the deterioration of domestic public 
opinion and a call for troop withdrawal from the Taliban insurgents 
who held 20 Koreans hostage, the ROKG could not afford to continue 
to have troops stationed there. 
 
Since then, the ROKG has maintained its stance against troop 
redeployment.  We also repeatedly pointed out that it would be 
reckless to send troops other than reconstruction staff or police 
instructors.  Just because there were changes of governments in the 
ROK and the U.S. does not mean that such a position must be changed. 
 With the situation in Afghanistan deteriorating further, even in 
the U.S., which is leading the war, supporters of the troop pullout 
outnumber those opposed to the pullout. 
 
This is why the Obama Administration is hastening to withdraw troops 
from Iraq and is focusing on stabilizing the situation in 
Afghanistan.  In particular, it is vital to maintain the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) led by the U.S. and 
NATO.  A majority of the 19 nations that contributed over 300 troops 
to the ISAF are showing signs of breaking ranks.  This might be the 
reason why the ROKG came up with a plan to increase its PRT staff to 
300 and send 300 guard troops to the region. 
 
In the joint communiqu of the SCM, U.S. Defense Secretary Gates 
 
SEOUL 00001687  006 OF 007 
 
 
stressed the expansion of the ROK's contribution to peacekeeping 
operations.  However, it is far-fetched to argue that Secretary 
Gates' emphasis on the role of the ROK military makes the troop 
dispatch inevitable.  In order to protect the civilian team, 
however, combat troops, who are stronger than the units of military 
medics or engineers, are needed.  Police officers are not 
appropriate.  Talking about sending mercenaries will also only 
invite uncontrollable controversy.  Rather than vaguely citing the 
ROK-U.S. alliance as a reason for troop deployment, the ROKG should 
first come up with alternatives that can win public approval. 
 
 
 
IT IS TOO EARLY TO REGAIN WARTIME OPERATIONAL CONTROL FROM U.S. IN 
APRIL, 2012 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 23, 2009, page 46: Excerpts) 
 
In a joint statement following the Security Consultative Meeting 
(SCM) in Seoul yesterday, ROK and U.S. defense ministers reaffirmed 
that the ROK will take over wartime operational control of its 
military forces from the U.S. by April 17, 2012.   It seems that the 
two ministers made this commitment, mindful that an increasing 
number of ROK people are raising concerns over the transfer of 
wartime operational control or voicing opposition to the plan, 
saying it is too early.  Their agreement, however, is not enough to 
defuse controversy.  Considering the ROK military's (lack of 
progress in) modernization, the ROK's economic situation and 
security conditions on the Korean Peninsula, a transfer of wartime 
operational control to the ROK as planned is highly likely to 
undermine security on the Korean Peninsula.  At the National 
Assembly early this month, Defense Minister Kim Tae-young said that 
it would be best to maintain the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command 
but the ROK has no choice but to prepare for its disbandment because 
the two nations agreed to do so. 
 
During the National Assembly audit on the Defense Ministry, 
lawmakers pointed out many problems regarding the ROK's defense 
position.  In the joint statement, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert 
Gates pledged to keep providing complementary forces until the ROK 
is capable of defending itself on its own even after the transfer of 
wartime operational control.  The U.S. specifically said it is 
committed to providing extended deterrence against the North Korean 
nuclear threat using the nuclear umbrella, and conventional strike 
and missile capabilities.  This assurance seems to have been made 
due to concerns that ROK forces will likely be weakened after the 
transfer of wartime operational control. 
 
For years until the ROK and the U.S. agreed in 2006 to disband the 
ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Command, the two countries were at odds 
over several foreign and security issues including the North Korean 
nuclear issue.  In particular, former President Roh Moo-hyun, who 
had emphasized self-defense since taking office, was too idealistic 
when he requested that the U.S.  hand over wartime operational 
control.  This request, however, conformed to the interest of the 
U.S. which embarked on restructuring its military to enhance 
mobility.  Therefore, the ROK and the U.S. agreed to the transfer of 
wartime operational control, not based on the objective evaluation 
of ROK military's mid-and long-term capabilities but because of 
temporary conflicts between the two countries and the strategic 
change in U.S. military alignment. 
 
Whatever prompted the agreement, the ROK is not in a position to 
halt the transfer process of wartime operational control right now. 
It is evident that we should make our greatest efforts to achieve 
self-defense.  However, the ROK's "Defense Reform 2020," which was 
initiated in 2005, is suffering a setback in several areas.  In 
addition, we are unlikely to find ways to resolve problems 
(regarding our defense) until April 2012.  Therefore, we have no 
other option but to continue to strengthen the combat capabilities 
of our military while at the same time seeking renegotiation with 
the U.S. over the transfer of wartime operational control to delay 
the timetable (for the transfer.) 
 
 
 
SEOUL 00001687  007 OF 007 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>