^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL720  |  2009-05-07 06:41  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론보도 2009년 5월 7일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 000720

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론보도 2009년 5월 7일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2015/07/04 16:43//

===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
국정원장, 검찰에 ＂盧 불구속 해달라＂;극비리에 직원 보내 의견 전달… 검찰 ＂수사권 침해＂ 강력 반발

중앙일보
지금 경제위기 맞나, 백화점 쇼핑객 넘치고 고속도로 미어터지고 카드사용액도 늘어나

동아일보
'박(朴) 세무조사 로비' 천신일 계좌추적

한국일보, 한겨레 신문, 서울신문
검찰, 서울국세청 전격 압수수색/ '박연차 구명로비' 조준

세계일보
글로벌 경기 침체터널 벗어나나, 美 주택지표 등 호전… 버냉키 "연말 회복 기대"

===== 국내 동향 =====

한국은 어제 국무회의에서 940억 원 이상의 아프간 원조 방안을 확대하고 아프간에 원조 인력을 추가로 파견하기로 의결하였다. (모든 매체)

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 북핵 협상을 위해 오늘부터 중국, 한국, 일본, 러시아 등 북핵 6자회담 참가국들을 순방한다. 한국 미디어는 보즈워스 대사의 평양 방문 가능성에 초점을 맞추고 있다. 다만 로버트 우드 미 국무부 부대변인은 6일 브리핑에서 “(보즈워스 등) 대표단은 북한을 방문할 계획이 현재로썬 없다”고 밝혔다.

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

한국 정부 소식통에 의하면 북한이 최근 평안북도 철산군 동창리의 새 장거리 미사일 시험장 건설을 서두르고 있는 것으로 파악되었다. …또 북한이 지난 2006년 지하 핵실험을 실시한 함경북도 길주군 풍계리에서 차량과 사람이 활발히 움직이는 등 핵실험 준비 징후를 보인다. (조선) 

잭 프리처드 부시 정부 시절 대북특사는 5일 조선일보와의 인터뷰에서 "6자회담은 이제 끝났다"며 남한과 북한 미국과 중국 사이 4자회담 형태로 북핵 문제를 풀어갈 공산이 커졌다고 말했다. (조선)
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

보즈워스 아시아 순방해 북핵 논의

한국 언론 대다수는 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 북핵 협상을 위해 5월 7~14일까지 6자회담 참가국을 방문한다는 소식에 관심을 보였다.

보수 조선일보와 중도 서울신문은 특히 보즈워스의 평양 방문 가능성에 보도의 초점을 맞췄다. 조선은 보즈워스가 5일 동안 서울에 체류한다면서 북한 방문 가능성과 관계가 있을 수 있다고 추론했다. 서울신문은 반면에 로버트 우드 국무부 대변인이 “(보즈워스 등) 대표단은 북한을 방문할 계획이 현재로썬 없다”고 한 5월 6일 발언을 언급하며 이를 두고 미국 정부가 보즈워스 대사의 평양 방문을 추진하고 있음을 보여준다고 해석하였다.

핵과 미사일 활동/ 6자회담

보수 조선일보는 한국 정부 소식통을 인용하며 북한이 최근 평안북도 철산군 동창리의 새 장거리 미사일 시험장 건설을 서두르고 있는 것으로 파악되었다고 보도했다. 동 보도는 북한이 지난 2006년 지하 핵실험을 실시한 함경북도 길주군 풍계리에서 차량과 사람이 활발히 움직이는 등 핵실험 준비 징후를 보인다고 덧붙였다.

조선일보는 잭 프리처드 부시 정부 시설 대북 협상 특사와 함께한 인터뷰에서 6자회담은 끝났고 앞으로는 남북한과 미국, 중국 사이 4자 회담을 활용해 북핵 현안을 풀어갈 공산이 커졌다는 그의 발언을 인용하였다.

===== 특집 =====

“아프간에 태권도·직업훈련 요원 파견”(중앙일보 2009년 5월 7일, 1면)

예영준 기자

정부는 6일 아프가니스탄 재건 지원을 위해 컴퓨터 등 직업훈련요원과 태권도 훈련 교관을 내년 초 파견해 현재 의료지원을 중심으로 25명이 활동 중인 지역재건사업팀(PRT) 인력을 85명으로 늘리기로 했다. 또 직업훈련센터와 병원 신·증축을 위해 253억원(미화 1950만 달러)의 예산을 추가 투입하고 구급차·순찰용 오토바이 등 500만 달러 상당의 장비도 지원키로 했다. 정부는 이날 한승수 총리 주재로 국무회의를 열어 이 같은 내용의 지원 방안을 의결했다.

태권도 교관 12명은 아프가니스탄의 경찰관을 훈련시키는 임무를 맡게 된다. 정부는 2002년부터 지난해까지 모두 6600만 달러 상당을 지원한 바 있다. 이번 지원 확대 방안에는 현금을 지원하는 재정 기여 방안이나 논란이 끊이지 않고 있는 재파병 방안은 포함되지 않았다.

北, 미사일 시험장(平北 철산군 동창리) 건설 서둘러;완공 수개월 빨라질듯 풍계리선 핵실험 채비(조선일보 2009년 5월 7일 4면)

유용원 군사 전문 기자

북한이 최근 평안북도 철산군 동창리의 새 장거리 미사일 시험장 건설을 서두르고 있는 것으로 파악돼었다. …또 북한이 지난 2006년 지하 핵실험을 실시한 함경북도 길주군 풍계리에서 차량 및 사람이 활발히 움직이는 등 핵실험 준비 징후를 보이고 있(어 관계 당국이 예의주시하고 있는 것으로 알려졌다.)

정부 소식통은 6일 "북한이 최근 동창리 시험장에 장비와 인력을 종전보다 많이 투입해 공사를 서두르고 있는 것으로 파악됐다"며 "당초 금년 말쯤 완공될 것으로 예상됐는데 수개월 앞당겨질 것 같다"고 했다. 북한은 8년 전 동창리 시험장 건설을 시작해 지난해 9월까지 80%의 공정을 보였다.

군 당국은 특히 북한 외무성이 지난달 29일 "유엔 안전보장이사회가 대북 제재를 철회하고 사죄하지 않으면 2차 핵실험과 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM) 발사 시험을 할 것"이라고 경고한 것과 관련, 동창리 시험장 완공을 앞당겨 이곳에서 장거리 탄도미사일 발사 시험을 할 가능성이 있다고 보고 있다.

동창리 시험장은 북한이 지난달 5일 장거리 로켓을 발사한 함경북도 화대군 무수단리 시험장보다 훨씬 크고 현대화된 설비를 갖추고 있어 대륙간탄도미사일과 인공위성용 우주발사체를 모두 발사할 수 있는 것으로 평가된다.

…정부 소식통은 "지하 핵실험은 사전 예측이 어려워 언제 핵실험이 가능한지 정확히 알 수는 없으나 북한이 의지만 있으면 가까운 시일 내 실시할 수 있는 준비를 갖춘 상태로 보고 있다"고 했다.

(우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 마지막 문장을 추가하였다.)

＂6자회담은 끝났다… 앞으론 4자회담(남한·북한·미국·중국) 형태로 北核문제 풀 듯＂(조선일보 2009년 5월 7일 4면)

이하원 워싱턴 특파원

부시 행정부서 對北특사 역임한 잭 프리처드 인터뷰

"대화하려는 오바마에 북한, 계속해서 도발… 좋은 기회 놓치고 있다"

"북한은 부시(Bush) 행정부와 다른 정책을 펼치려는 오바마(Obama) 행정부의 입장을 정확하게 파악하는 데 실패했습니다. 김정일 북한 국방위원장은 당장 오바마 행정부의 입장을 잘못 분석한 북한의 대미(對美) 전문가들을 해고해야 합니다."

잭 프리처드(Pritchard) 전 미 대북특사는 5일 본지와의 인터뷰에서 미사일을 발사한 후에도 대화를 거부하는 북한이 "좋은 기회를 놓치고 있다"고 비판했다. 그는 "6자회담은 이제 끝났다"며 앞으로 북한이 대화의 장(場)으로 나올 경우, 1990년대에 실시됐던 4자회담 형태의 새로운 다자(多者) 회담이 출현할 가능성을 예상했다. 인터뷰는 5일, 그가 소장으로 있는 한미경제연구소(KEI)에서 1시간 진행됐다.

―북한이 '오바마 행정부는 부시 행정부와 같다'고 비판하며 나섰는데.

"북한의 태도에 근본적인 문제가 있다. 오바마 행정부는 한반도 팀과 정책을 만들기 위한 시간이 필요했다. 하지만 북한이 미사일 발사를 비롯한 계속된 도발로 잘못된 환경을 조성했다. 그들은 이런 도발이 오바마 행정부에 어떤 영향을 미칠지를 예측하지 못했다."

―오바마 행정부와 부시 행정부는 어떻게 다른가.

"이란 쿠바 시리아와의 관계를 보라. 오바마는 이들 국가에 다른 행태로 다가가겠다고 공언했다. 더 많이 듣고, 고위급 차원의 대화를 하겠다고 했다. 다른 나라들은 모두 이에 긍정적으로 반응하는데, 북한 혼자만 좋은 기회를 놓치고 있다."

―북한의 행태가 오바마 행정부에 어떤 영향을 미치나.

"계속 도발을 하니까, 오바마 행정부는 (북한에 대해) 매우 조심하게 됐다. 북한은 '국외자(outlier)' 신세를 자초했다. 이제 오바마 행정부는 북한 문제에 초점을 두지 않으며, 심각하게 반응하려고도 안 한다."

―북한의 행동이 오바마 행정부의 고위 정책 담당자들에게도 나쁜 인상을 줬다는 얘긴가.

"지난 17년간 북한을 다뤄온, 현재 오바마 행정부에 합류한 인사들은 북한 문제에서 한발 물러난 상태이다. 당분간은 북한에 지나치게 부정적인 정책을 취하지도, 과도한 인센티브도 주지 않으면서 북한의 자기파멸적인(self-destructive) 모습을 지켜볼 것이다. 북한이 잘못 대응함에 따라 앞으로 미국의 정책은 다소 보수적으로 나타나게 될 가능성이 크다."

―6자회담이 재개되기 어려울 것으로 보나.

"6자회담은 이제 끝났다고 본다. 지금 상황에서 6자회담이 다시 재개될 것이라는 어떤 징후도 찾아볼 수 없다. 힐러리 클린턴(Clinton) 국무장관도 의회 청문회에서 6자회담에 대해 '아닐 것 같다(implausible)'는 단어를 쓰지 않았나."

―북한이 6자회담을 거부하고 나선 이유는 무엇인가.

"그들은 핵 문제는 미국과의 양자(兩者)문제라고 생각하기에, 일본과 러시아가 참여하는 것을 바라지 않는다. 나는 북한을 6자회담으로 복귀시킬 수는 없다고 본다. 하지만 우리는 다른 형태의 다자 회담을 만들 수는 있을 것이다."

―어떤 형태의 다자 회담이 6자회담을 대체 할 수 있나.

"1990년대에 남북한과 미국 중국이 참석하는 4자회담이 있었다. 당시의 근본적인 합의는 4자회담 내에서 양자회담, 3자회담 등 어떤 형태의 회담도 가능하다는 것이었다. 매우 융통성 있었다. 4자회담은 초기의 형태이고 나중에 다시 일본과 러시아도 참여할 수 있을 것이다. 하지만 미국·중국·북한이 참여한 3자회담은 잘 작동되지 않았기에 3자회담은 가능하지 않다고 본다."

―현재의 이런 대치 상태가 얼마나 오래갈 것으로 보나.

"아마도 최장 5개월까지 단기간에는 해결책이 없다. 지금은 미국이 무엇을 하려고 해도 북한은 움직일 준비가 돼 있지 않다. 북한은 계속해서 국내 정치적 이유에 기반을 둔 공격적인 정책을 만들 것이다."

―북한의 2차 핵실험 가능성은 얼마나 되나.

"북한의 핵실험 가능성은 높아질 것이다. 무엇보다 중국이 2006년 1718호 유엔 안보리 결의를 인정하는 안보리 의장성명에 합의해줬기 때문에, 북한은 분노한 상태다. 북한은 2006년 1차 핵실험 당시에도 중국의 핵실험 중단 요구를 듣지 않았다."

―현 상황을 푸는 해법은 무엇인가.

"굳이 보즈워스 대표가 북한에 가려고 할 필요가 없다. 북한 외무성의 강석주 제1부상을 뉴욕이 아닌 워싱턴으로 초청해서 그냥 대화를 시작해야 한다. 미국과 북한 간 상호 오해가 깊어지는 것을 막아야 한다."

스탠턴
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL720.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 000720 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; May 7, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
National Intelligence Service Chief Asked Prosecution Not to Arrest 
Former President Roh, Drawing Protests from Prosecutors 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Is the ROK Economy Out of the Woods? Department Stores Overflow with 
Shoppers and Purchases 
by Credit Card have Increased 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Prosecutors Tracing Bank Accounts of Chun Shin-il, 
a Long-time Friend of President Lee Myung-bak, 
in "Park Yeon-cha Bribery Scandal" 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun, Seoul Shinmun 
Prosecutors Raid Tax Office in Ongoing Bribery Scandal 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke Says U.S. Economy out of 
Recession by End of Year 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
The ROK Cabinet yesterday approved plans to offer an aid package of 
more than $74 million and dispatch additional aid workers to 
Afghanistan. (All) 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
will visit Beijing, Seoul, Tokyo and Moscow starting today for 
consultations on the North Korean nuclear issue. Korean media has 
focused on the possibility that Ambassador Bosworth may visit 
Pyongyang, even though State Department Spokesman Robert Wood said 
on May 6 that he "has no current plans to visit North Korea." 
(Chosun, Seoul, all TVs, OhmyNews) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to an ROKG source, North Korea has been speeding up 
construction of a new long-range missile test site in Tongchangri, 
North Pyongan Province. Furthermore, vehicles and personnel are 
busily moving around in Kilju, North Hamgyeong Province, where the 
North conducted an underground nuclear test in 2006, showing signs 
of preparations for another test. (Chosun) 
 
Jack Pritchard, former special envoy for negotiations with North 
Korea under the Bush Administration, said in a May 5 interview with 
Chosun Ilbo that the Six-Party Talks have come to an end and that 
four-way talks between the two Koreas, the U.S. and China will 
likely be used to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue in the 
future. (Chosun) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-North Korea 
------------ 
Bosworth to Tour Asia for Talks 
 
Most ROK media gave attention to U.S. Special Representative for 
North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth's May 7-14 visit to countries 
involved in the Six-Party Talks for consultations on the North 
Korean nuclear issue. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo and moderate Seoul Shinmun, in particular, 
focused coverage on the possibility of Ambassador Bosworth's visit 
 
SEOUL 00000720  002 OF 004 
 
 
to Pyongyang.  Chosun noted Ambassador Bosworth's four-day stay in 
Seoul and speculated that this may have to do with his possible 
visit to North Korea.  Seoul Shinmun, on the other hand, referred to 
State Department Spokesman Robert Wood's May 6 statement, "The 
delegation's meeting schedule is still being arranged," and 
interpreted this as indicating that Washington is pursuing an 
invitation for the Ambassador to visit Pyongyang. 
 
Nuclear and Missile Activities/ Six-Party Talks 
 
Citing an ROKG source, conservative Chosun Ilbo reported that North 
Korea has been speeding up construction of a new long-range missile 
test site in Tongchangri, North Pyongan Province.  The report went 
on to say that vehicles and personnel are also busily moving around 
in Kilju, North Hamgyeong Province, where the North conducted an 
underground nuclear test in 2006, showing signs of preparations for 
another test. 
 
Chosun also featured a May 5 interview with Jack Pritchard, former 
special envoy for negotiations with North Korea under the Bush 
Administration, quoting him as saying that the Six-Party Talks have 
come to an end and that four-way talks between the two Koreas, the 
U.S. and China will likely be used to resolve the North Korean 
nuclear issue in the future. 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
SEOUL PLANS TO SEND TAEKWONDO INSTRUCTORS AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING 
WORKERS TO AFGHANISTAN 
(JoongAng Ilbo, May 7, 2009, Front Page) 
 
By Reporter Ye Young-joon 
 
The aid package to Afghanistan announced by the ROKG on May 6 
includes plans to increase the number of ROK aid workers of the 
Provincial Reconstruction Teams from 25, mainly medical staff, to 85 
by sending trainers in vocational education and computer skills and 
taekwondo instructors early next year.  The ROKG also plans to spend 
an additional 25.3 billion won (19.5 million dollars) building and 
expanding vocational training centers and hospitals and to provide 
ambulances and patrol motorbikes worth 5 million dollars.  This plan 
was approved at a Cabinet meeting, which was held on May 6 under the 
presidency of Prime Minister Han Seung-soo. 
 
A total of 12 taekwondo instructors will be tasked with training 
police in Afghanistan.  From 2002 to last year, the ROKG provided 
aid worth 66 million dollars to the reconstruction efforts in 
Afghanistan.  This time, the aid package does not include cash 
contributions and troop redeployment, which have continuously 
stirred up controversy. 
 
 
ACTIVITY AT N. KOREAN TEST SITES INTENSIFIES 
(Chosun Ilbo, May 7, 2009, Page 4) 
 
By Military Affairs Reporter Yoo Yong-won 
 
North Korea has been speeding up construction of a new long-range 
missile test site in Tongchangri, North Pyongan Province.   In 
addition, vehicles and personnel are busily moving around in Kilju, 
North Hamgyeong Province, where the North conducted an underground 
nuclear test in 2006, showing signs of preparations for another. 
 
"The North has recently been speeding up construction at the test 
site in Tongchangri by deploying more equipment and personnel," an 
ROKG source said Wednesday.  "We expected the North would complete 
construction sometime late this year, but it now seems that it could 
be completed several months earlier."  Construction of the test site 
began eight years ago and was 80 percent complete last September. 
 
ROK military authorities believe the North could accelerate 
completion of the test site and test-launch a long-range ballistic 
 
SEOUL 00000720  003 OF 004 
 
 
missile from there.  North Korea on April 29 threatened to conduct a 
second nuclear test and test an intercontinental ballistic missile, 
unless the UN Security Council lifts sanctions against it and 
"apologizes." 
 
The test site in Tongchangri is believed to be capable of launching 
both ICBMs and satellite rockets, and is much larger and has more 
up-to-date facilities than the current similar test site in 
Musudanri, North Hamgyong Province. 
 
The ROKG source noted, "Since an underground nuclear test is 
difficult to predict in advance, we do not know exactly when a 
nuclear test will be possible, but we think that the North is 
prepared to conduct the test in the near future whenever it wants." 
 
(We have compared the English version on the website with the Korean 
version and added the last paragraph to make them identical.) 
 
 
"SIX-PARTY TALKS HAVE COME TO AN END... FOUR-WAY TALKS WILL LIKELY 
BE USED TO RESOLVE NORTH KOREAN NUCLEAR ISSUE" 
(Chosun Ilbo, May 7, 2009, Page 4) 
 
By Washington Correspondent Lee Ha-won 
 
Interview with Jack Pritchard, former Bush Administration Special 
Envoy for Negotiations with North Korea 
 
"North Korea is missing a good opportunity by continuing its 
provocations against Obama, who wants dialogue." 
 
"North Korea failed to understand exactly the position of the Obama 
Administration, which intends to carry out a different policy from 
the Bush Administration.  North Korea's National Defense Committee 
Chairman Kim Jong-il should immediately dismiss the North Korean 
experts on the U.S. due to their incorrect analysis of the position 
of the Obama Administration." 
 
Jack Pritchard, former Bush Administration Special Envoy for 
Negotiations with North Korea, made the statement during a May 5 
interview with Chosun Ilbo.  He also criticized the North, which is 
rejecting dialogue even after its missile launch, for "missing a 
good opportunity."  Saying, "The Six-Party Talks have ended now," he 
predicted that if the North returns to dialogue, new multilateral 
talks like the four-party talks in the 1990s will emerge.  The 
hour-long interview was conducted on May 5 at the Korea Economic 
Institute headed by Mr. Pritchard. 
 
¶Q. North Korea has criticized the Obama Administration, saying that 
it is no different from the Bush Administration. 
 
"There is a fundamental problem with North Korea's attitude.  The 
Obama Administration needed some time to set up a team and formulate 
policy regarding the Korean Peninsula.  However, the North Koreans 
created the wrong atmosphere by making a series of provocations, 
including the missile launch.  They did not predict how their 
provocations would affect the Obama Administration." 
 
¶Q. What is the difference between the Obama Administration and the 
Bush Administration? 
 
"Look at (U.S.) relations with Iran, Cuba and Syria.  President 
Obama publicly said that he will reach out to those nations in a 
different way.  He said he will listen to them more and have 
high-level talks.  Other nations have responded positively to this, 
but only the North is losing this good opportunity." 
 
¶Q. How does North Korea's behavior affect the Obama Administration? 
 
"Because the North continuously makes provocations, the Obama 
Administration has become very cautious (about the North).  The 
North brought the 'outlier' status on itself.  Now the Obama 
Administration neither focuses on the North Korean issue nor 
responds seriously to it." 
 
SEOUL 00000720  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶Q. You mean that North Korea's behavior gave a bad impression to 
high-level policy officials in the Obama Administration? 
 
"The officials, who have been dealing with North Korean issues for 
the past 17 years and have now joined the Obama Administration, are 
now one step away from the North Korean issue.  For the time being, 
they will neither adopt a too negative policy toward the North nor 
give excessive incentives to the North, but they will watch North 
Korea's self-destructive actions.  As the North has responded 
wrongly, the U.S. policy is highly likely to turn rather 
conservative." 
 
¶Q. Do you think that it will be difficult to restart the Six-Party 
Talks? 
 
"I think that the Six-Party Talks have ended now.  At the moment, 
there are no signs that the Six-Party Talks will resume.  Secretary 
of State Hillary Clinton also said at a Congressional hearing that 
it is 'implausible' that the North will return to the Six-Party 
Talks." 
 
¶Q. Why do you think the North Koreans quit the Six-Party Talks? 
 
"Since they consider the nuclear issue a bilateral issue with the 
U.S., they do not want Japan and Russia to join.  I think that we 
cannot bring the North back to the Six-Party Talks.  However, we 
could create another form of multilateral talks." 
 
¶Q. What form of multilateral talks can replace the Six-Party Talks? 
 
"In the 1990s, we had the four-party talks involving the two Koreas, 
the U.S. and China.  The fundamental agreement at that time was that 
any form of dialogue - whether they were bilateral or trilateral 
talks - were possible within the four-party talks.  It was very 
flexible.  Dialogue can initially take the form of four-party talks, 
and later Japan and Russia can joining again.  However, since the 
trilateral talks involving the U.S., China and North Korea did not 
work well, I do not think that the trilateral talks are possible." 
 
¶Q. How long do you think the current confrontation will last? 
 
"Probably for about five months.  We do not have a solution in the 
short term.  Even if the U.S. tries to do something, the North is 
not prepared to budge.  North Korea will continue to come up with an 
aggressive policy on the ground of domestic political 
considerations." 
 
¶Q. What is the possibility of North Korea conducting a second 
nuclear test? 
 
"The possibility that North Korea will (carry out another) nuclear 
test will increase.  Above all, since China agreed to the UN 
Security Council presidential statement recognizing UNSC Resolution 
1718, North Korea is furious.  When the North carried out the first 
nuclear test in 2006, it also rejected China's demand to stop the 
test." 
 
¶Q. What is the solution to the current situation? 
 
"Representative Bosworth does not need to go as far as to visit 
North Korea.  We should invite North Korea's First Vice Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Kang Suk-joo to Washington, not to New York, and 
start dialogue.  We should prevent a further deepening of 
misunderstanding between the U.S. and North Korea." 
 
 
STANTON
</file>