^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1572  |  2009-10-01  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 1일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001572

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=83205|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 1일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/01/31 11:24//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 모든 텔레비전
인도네시아 강진 수천명 매몰;사모아에선 쓰나미 발생… 한국인 2명 포함 120여명 사망

중앙일보
'짐승'을 다스리지 못한 나라

동아일보, 서울신문
이명박, “선거-행정구역 개편 빠른 논의를”

한겨레, 세계일보
“남북관계·국제이슈 주도할 때”/李대통령 'G20 유치' 회견

한겨레 신문
“세종시 수정” “당론은 원안”…여권 이중행태

===== 국내 동향 =====

“이명박 대통령은 30일 특별기자회견에서 '이제 남북문제는 물론 국제적 이슈에 대해서도 우리의 비전과 해법을 내놓고 주도하는 노력을 할 때가 됐다'고 말했다. (전체)

제임스 스타인버그 미국 국무부 부장관은 이날 권종락 외교통상부 제1차관과의 회담이 끝난 뒤 기자들과 만나 한국의 ‘그랜드 바겐’ 제안을 두고 한미 사이 이견이 없다고 말했다. 그는 또 북한은 "엄청난 기회"를 잡고 6자회담에 복귀할 것을 촉구하였다. (조선, 중앙, 동아, 한국, 세계, 서울, 모든 텔레비전)

제임스 스타인버그 미국 국무부 부장관은 [[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3493177|중앙일보와의 인터뷰]] 중에 북한이 핵무기를 제거하는 구체적이고 불가역적인 조치를 취할 때까지 유엔의 대북 제재를 풀지 않을 것이라고 선언했다. (중앙)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

이 대통령의 ‘그랜드 바겐’ 제안에 대한 북한 당국의 첫 반응으로 볼 수 있는 북한 조선중앙통신의 반응이 나왔다. 북한 방송은 이 대통령의 그랜드 바겐 제안은 “조-미 사이의 핵문제 해결에 끼어들어 방해”하려는 기도라고 30일 말했다. (중앙, 한국, 한겨레, 세계)

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표는 보즈워스 대표는 28일(현지시간) 동아시아포럼이 주관한 인터뷰에서 “북핵 문제에서 군사적 해법은 없으며, 협상만이 나아갈 방향”이라며 “북한을 방문하면 미국이 협상 프로세스를 다시 시작할 용의가 있음을 알릴 것”이라고 말했다. ([[http://gangnam.joins.com/news/article/article.aspx?total_id=3802874|중앙]])

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 방한 중은 제임스 스타인버그 국무부 부장관의 발언을 다뤘다. 그의 발언 내용: “미국은 북한을 6자회담에 복귀시키기 위해 직접적인 (북-미)양자 접촉에 나설 준비가 돼 있다. …북한이 이 기회를 잡아야 할 것이다."

제임스 스타인버그 미국 국무부 부장관이 중앙일보와의 인터뷰에서 한 발언 내용: "북한이 핵무기를 제거하는 구체적이고 불가역적인 조치를 취할 때까지 유엔의 대북 제재를 풀지 않을 것이다"

대다수 언론은 스타인버그 부장관의 발언을 언급했다. "(’미국의 포괄적 접근’과 한국의 ‘그랜드 바겐’ 사이) "우리의 해법에는 아무런 이견이 없다. 이명박 대통령이 말하는 것은 그간 한·미가 협의해 온 사안으로, 포괄적이고 결정적인 해결책이 필요하다는 점에서 차이가 없다.” 대다수 신문은 똑 같은 부제를 달았다. <스타인버그: 그랜드 바겐에 대해 양국 이견 없다.>

대다수 한국 언론은 북한 조선중앙통신이 북핵 문제는 조미 양자 문제이며 그랜드 바겐 제안은 “조-미 사이의 핵문제 해결에 끼어들어 방해”하려는 기도라는 주장을 펼쳤다며 이 대통령의 ‘그랜드 바겐’ 제안을 북한이 거절한 내용에 대해 보도하였다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 28일 동아시아포럼에서 한 발언을 인용하였다. “북핵 문제에서 군사적 해법은 없으며, 협상만이 나아갈 방향이다. 북한을 방문하면 미국이 협상 프로세스를 다시 시작할 용의가 있음을 알릴 것이다."

중국이 최근 대규모 대북 원조를 제공할 의향을 시사한 것과 관련한 [[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/09/30/2009093001835.html|조선일보 사설]]: "북한이 중국으로부터 대규모 지원을 받아 경제적으로 급한 상황을 넘기고 나면 회담장에선 그럴듯한 주장을 늘어놓으면서 뒷전으로 핵개발을 계속하는 일을 되풀이할 가능성이 높다. …중국(과 미국)이 이런 사태를 원치 않는다면 대북 지원은 반드시 북핵 저지라는 국제 공조의 틀 안에서 이뤄져야 한다."

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/01/2009100100087.html|스타인버그 ＂그랜드바겐, 양국 이견없다＂]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 1일 4면)

임민혁 기자

제임스 스타인버그(Steinberg) 미국 국무부 부장관은 30일 "(북핵 해법으로 한국이 제시한) '그랜드 바겐'은 그간 한·미가 협의해 온 사안으로, 포괄적이고 결정적인 해결책이 필요하다는 점에서 양국 간 아무런 이견이 없다"고 했다.

스타인버그 부장관은 이날 서울 외교부 청사에서 권종락 제1차관을 만난 뒤 기자들에게 이 같이 밝히고 "한국·일본·러시아·중국과 협의를 거쳐 우리는 북한을 6자회담에 복귀시키기 위해 양자 대화에 나설 준비가 돼 있다"고 했다.

그는 "북한이 이 기회를 잡아야 할 것"이라며 "우리는 북한이 그 기회를 잡는다면 필요한 대응을 해 나갈 것"이라고 했다. 그는 또 "지금은 북한이 6자회담에 복귀하도록 다른 5개 참가국이 공조를 유지하는 데 초점을 맞추고 있다"며 "6자회담을 통해 완전하고 불가역적인 비핵화를 이뤄야 한다는 데 5자가 모두 공감하고 있다"고 했다.

스타인버그 부장관은 앞서 김성환 청와대 외교안보수석과 북핵 6자회담 우리측 수석대표인 위성락 외교부 한반도평화교섭본부장과 조찬을 함께하며 '그랜드 바겐'과 미·북 양자대화의 시기와 조건 등을 논의한 것으로 알려졌다.

**[[http://news.donga.com/3/all/20091001/8846198/1|“北 양자접촉 기회 잡아야” 스타인버그 美국무 부장관]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 1일; 발췌)

김영식, 신석호 기자

…스타인버그 부장관은 이날 외교통상부 청사에서 권종락 외교부 1차관을 만난 뒤 “북한은 6자회담에 복귀하는 것이 더 생산적인 길로 나아가는 기회임을 이해해야 한다”며 이같이 강조했다.

…한편 북한은 30일 이명박 대통령의 ‘그랜드 바겐’ 제안에 대해 처음으로 반대 의견을 내놨다.

북한 조선중앙통신은 이날 “미국의 반공화국 적대시 정책 철회 없이 우리의 핵 포기에 대해 운운하는 것은 허황한 꿈”이라고 주장했다.

**[[http://www.koreadaily.com/news/read.asp?art_id=917767|“북한 핵무기 제거 전에는 제재 안 푼다”]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 1일 1면)

김영희 대기자

제임스 스타인버그 미국 국무부 부장관은 30일 북한이 핵무기를 제거하는 구체적이고 불가역적인 조치를 취할 때까지 유엔 안보리 결의 1874호에 따른 북한 제재를 풀지 않을 것이라고 선언했다. 오바마 정부 대북정책의 사령탑인 그는 북한이 필요한 조치를 취하기 전에는 제재 완화를 논의도 하지 않을 것이라고 말했다.

한·중·일 3국을 순방 중인 스타인버그 부장관은 중앙일보와의 단독 인터뷰에서 북한과의 대화를 모색하는 지금의 여러 가지 외교적인 움직임은 입장의 선회가 아니라고 단정적으로 말했다. 그는 “우리는 1874호 제재를 단호하게 이행하고 있다. 우리는 물러서지 않는다”고 말했다. 스타인버그 부장관은 북한이 최근 한국과 미국에 일련의 유화적인 조치를 취하는 것은 제재가 효과를 내고, 지금 북한이 걷는 방향이 북한을 고립시키고 북한의 안보를 약화시킨다는 사실을 인식한 결과로 본다고 말했다.

스타인버그 부장관은 이명박 대통령이 지난달 16일 뉴욕에서 새로운 북핵 해결방안으로 제안한 그랜드 바긴(일괄타결)과 오바마 정부의 패키지 딜(포괄적인 타결)은 내용이 동일한 것이라고 말했다.

**[[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3493177|스타인버그 미 국무부 부장관의 '북핵 해법'···"북 핵보유 눈감아주는 타협 절대 없다"]]** (중앙일보, 2009년 10월 1일 10면)

김영희 대기자

스타인버그 국무부 부장관과 함께한 인터뷰

아시아 5개국을 6박7일 동안 도는 강행군 속에서도 제임스 스타인버그 미국 국무부 부장관은 피곤한 빛을 보이지 않았다. 30일 미국 대사관 회의실에서 진행된 인터뷰에서 북한을 겨냥한 그의 언어는 단호했다.

그는 북한에 끌려가고 있다는 미국 내 강경론자들의 비판을 인식한 듯 대북제재를 누그러뜨릴 뜻이 없다는 점을 크게 강조했다.

-이명박 대통령이 제시한 그랜드바긴(일괄타결)과 오바마 정부의 패키지 딜(포괄적 타결)을 조율하려는 노력이 있었을 텐데 얼마나 진전됐나.

"두 방안은 동일한 것이다. 뭐라고 부르던 과거와는 다른 접근 방식을 취해야 한다는 데 한.미 간은 물론 다른 6자회담 참여국과도 전혀 이견이 없다. 우리는 과거처럼 진퇴를 반복하는 대북정책을 더 이상 원치 않는다."

-그렇다면 이 대통령의 그랜드 바긴 정책 발표 후 미 국무부 대변인 반응은 왜 냉담했나.

"그건 정확하지 않은 반응이었다."

-그랜드 바긴 아이디어는 지난 6월 한.미 정상회담에서 나온 것인가.

"그렇다. 이 대통령이 밝힌 것처럼 대북 사안을 하나하나씩 단계적으로 풀어가는 '피스밀(Piecemeal)'식 접근 방식은 안 된다는 점에 양국은 인식을 같이했다. 뭔가를 하면 뭔가 대가를 주고 다른 걸 하면 또 다른 보상을 주는 방식은 제대로 돌아가지 않는다."

-김정일 국방위원장의 다자회담과 북.미 회담에 복귀할 의향이 있다고 했는데.

"그간 중국 관리들이 북한을 방문했고 북한인들도 중국으로 가서 다양한 접촉이 있었다. 우리는 북한이 진심으로 복귀할 의사가 있는지 지켜볼 것이다."

-베이징에서 한.중.일 정상회담도 열리는데 북핵에 획기적인 돌파구가 나올까.

"북한이 앞으로 전진하기 위한 전략적 결정을 내릴 준비가 돼 있느냐에 달렸다. 우리는 준비돼 있다. 북한이 걸어 들어올 문은 활짝 열려 있는 것이다. 그들은 6자회담에 다시 참여할 수 있다. 그렇게 되면 우리는 목적지에 도달하기 위한 좀 더 자세한 세부 사항을 논의할 수 있다.

김 위원장의 전략적 결정이 필요하다."

-전략적 결정이 뭔가.

"핵무기를 보유하는 것보다 포기하는 게 북한을 번영시키는 일이라는 점을 인식하는 것이다. 이것이 전략적 결정의 핵심이다. 그렇게 하면 많은 것이 가능하다."

-효과를 내고 있는 대북제재를 3개월 6개월 더 계속 하는 게 비핵화에 도움이 되는가.

"북한이 (비핵화와 관련된) 필요한 조치를 취하지 않으면 제재 철회를 논의하지 않을 거란 점을 우리는 분명히 밝혀왔다. 지금 우리가 논의하려는 건 대북제재 문제가 아니다. 다른 6자회담 참가국과도 유엔 안보리 결의 1874호를 계속 유지한다는 데 합의했다. 현재 대북제재를 완화하거나 종결하자는 제안은 전혀 없다."

-제재와 대화를 함께 진행하는 '투 트랙(Two Track)' 정책을 균형 있게 추진 중인데 어떤 상황이 되면 대화 쪽에 무게가 실릴까.

" 과거처럼 대화를 위해 제재를 풀어주는 일은 없다. 최근 북한이 감행한 여러 가지 사안에 주목할 필요가 있다. 그들은 미사일 발사와 핵실험을 하고 지난달 3일 유엔 안보리에 우라늄 농축 프로그램을 실시했다는 편지를 보내기도 했다. 따라서 국제사회가 대북제재 철폐를 검토하기 위해서는 북한이 해야 할 일이 많다."

-그렇다면 최근 추가 제재에서 대화 추진 쪽으로 방향을 튼 건 뭔가.

"방향 전환을 하지 않았다. 우리는 단호히 안보리 대북결의 1874호를 이행하고 있으며 이에 필요한 모든 수단을 보유하고 있다. 이미 여러 나라가 북한 선박을 제지한 바 있다. 어제 베이징에서도 결의 1874호의 이행문제를 논의했다. 말레이시아 총리와도 이 문제를 이야기했다. "

-핵을 확산하지 않는다는 조건하에서 북한의 핵 보유를 묵인하는 해결 방안도 있나.

"답이 간단한 몇 안 되는 질문이다. 답은 '노'다. 그런 우려는 아무런 근거도 없는 것이다. 우리는 북한의 불가역적이고 완전한 비핵화를 원한다."

-이란 핵 논란이 북핵 문제에 영향을 주나.

"크게 영향을 준다. 북한에 단호하지 못하면 우리가 핵확산을 묵인한다는 신호를 전 세계에 줄 수 있다. 북한 문제 자체도 중요하지만 핵 비확산 체제와 관련 이 사안이 갖고 있는 의미에 대해 우리는 큰 관심을 갖고 있다. "

-북한 내 '대변혁(Big Bang)'에 대한 비상계획(contingency plan)이 있나.

"정책 입안자는 다양한 옵션을 고려해야 한다. 그러나 자세한 내용을 밝히는 것은 적절치 않다."

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----MIIHPwYJKoZIhvcNAQcEoIIHMDCCBywCAQExggEwMIIBLAIBADCBlDCBjjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMxCzAJBgNVBAgTAkNBMRYwFAYDVQQHEw1Nb3VudGFpbiBWaWV3MRQwEgYDVQQKEwtQYXlQYWwgSW5jLjETMBEGA1UECxQKbGl2ZV9jZXJ0czERMA8GA1UEAxQIbGl2ZV9hcGkxHDAaBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWDXJlQHBheXBhbC5jb20CAQAwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEBBQAEgYBd+/HeuCYixamjPXNftIU59sb0XD9ZKKgCBcTcYeajIzAWC7yEypt1lxRKNYT3HOH4P8xUMLNzWP9a7U9TuKWl4dRn9E1k7I3uL6bQULmVcsLZeN6sSoyK9Rqr/o4Bywe6VRxp3RoTrcAVbgXPM9AAstIfNPDE69dVrHat10vyczELMAkGBSsOAwIaBQAwgbwGCSqGSIb3DQEHATAUBggqhkiG9w0DBwQI6NkKGfI+A0+AgZgivFcgUkPwQs1gTK5zYX5iMEoqI7Y5I/QaUOr5sZxX0DvD4ek6dQOHlHOMHg6WlNVH/dc5rTNphoDDtg47JMhRhtu5UJJaFrSmGMzh2jMpKQzuUoBpemUjWhFDLTrydI5b/+o4lFAC/EI8dxMUUEiNG5AxxeKgQ1liTunBLoDbCPg3NddStnWoPiyFk7RPqpxdrtwPgdKO7KCCA4cwggODMIIC7KADAgECAgEAMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBBQUAMIGOMQswCQYDVQQGEwJVUzELMAkGA1UECBMCQ0ExFjAUBgNVBAcTDU1vdW50YWluIFZpZXcxFDASBgNVBAoTC1BheVBhbCBJbmMuMRMwEQYDVQQLFApsaXZlX2NlcnRzMREwDwYDVQQDFAhsaXZlX2FwaTEcMBoGCSqGSIb3DQEJARYNcmVAcGF5cGFsLmNvbTAeFw0wNDAyMTMxMDEzMTVaFw0zNTAyMTMxMDEzMTVaMIGOMQswCQYDVQQGEwJVUzELMAkGA1UECBMCQ0ExFjAUBgNVBAcTDU1vdW50YWluIFZpZXcxFDASBgNVBAoTC1BheVBhbCBJbmMuMRMwEQYDVQQLFApsaXZlX2NlcnRzMREwDwYDVQQDFAhsaXZlX2FwaTEcMBoGCSqGSIb3DQEJARYNcmVAcGF5cGFsLmNvbTCBnzANBgkqhkiG9w0BAQEFAAOBjQAwgYkCgYEAwUdO3fxEzEtcnI7ZKZL412XvZPugoni7i7D7prCe0AtaHTc97CYgm7NsAtJyxNLixmhLV8pyIEaiHXWAh8fPKW+R017+EmXrr9EaquPmsVvTywAAE1PMNOKqo2kl4Gxiz9zZqIajOm1fZGWcGS0f5JQ2kBqNbvbg2/Za+GJ/qwUCAwEAAaOB7jCB6zAdBgNVHQ4EFgQUlp98u8ZvF71ZP1LXChvsENZklGswgbsGA1UdIwSBszCBsIAUlp98u8ZvF71ZP1LXChvsENZklGuhgZSkgZEwgY4xCzAJBgNVBAYTAlVTMQswCQYDVQQIEwJDQTEWMBQGA1UEBxMNTW91bnRhaW4gVmlldzEUMBIGA1UEChMLUGF5UGFsIEluYy4xEzARBgNVBAsUCmxpdmVfY2VydHMxETAPBgNVBAMUCGxpdmVfYXBpMRwwGgYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFg1yZUBwYXlwYWwuY29tggEAMAwGA1UdEwQFMAMBAf8wDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQADgYEAgV86VpqAWuXvX6Oro4qJ1tYVIT5DgWpE692Ag422H7yRIr/9j/iKG4Thia/Oflx4TdL+IFJBAyPK9v6zZNZtBgPBynXb048hsP16l2vi0k5Q2JKiPDsEfBhGI+HnxLXEaUWAcVfCsQFvd2A1sxRr67ip5y2wwBelUecP3AjJ+YcxggGaMIIBlgIBATCBlDCBjjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMxCzAJBgNVBAgTAkNBMRYwFAYDVQQHEw1Nb3VudGFpbiBWaWV3MRQwEgYDVQQKEwtQYXlQYWwgSW5jLjETMBEGA1UECxQKbGl2ZV9jZXJ0czERMA8GA1UEAxQIbGl2ZV9hcGkxHDAaBgkqhkiG9w0BCQEWDXJlQHBheXBhbC5jb20CAQAwCQYFKw4DAhoFAKBdMBgGCSqGSIb3DQEJAzELBgkqhkiG9w0BBwEwHAYJKoZIhvcNAQkFMQ8XDTE1MDQxOTA0MjMwN1owIwYJKoZIhvcNAQkEMRYEFAG0z/c0VdXvYZxtxEorY/BYbYT2MA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBAQUABIGAQ+u+8qzzKPhRvtviukCKuSSypNWbgmI/M1xkcCgiV6qJt9UXEtfd1Mqio9lczdic86Tlxzs0fNi8QJ/D8I+p7ITBARP/oPYacfLglP5oKaokLl/wr9VSn7TiqHPjwJuotJNrC48Xh9UO/rK9/bOtlb2rgyCsCFwAi8p8F3HOLVA=-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1572.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001572 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 1, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, All TVs 
Powerful Indonesia Quake Kills 120, Thousands Trapped; 
Death Toll Expected to Climb Sharply 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Citizens Enraged by "Light Sentence" Given 
to Heinous Child Rapist 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
President Lee Urges Political Circles to Hurry 
to Redraw Electoral and Administrative Districts 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Segye Ilbo 
President Lee: "It is Time for Korea to Take Lead in Global Issues, 
Including N. Korea's Nuclear Issue" 
 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Contradictory Remarks by Ruling Camp Officials Add to Confusion over 
Controversial Sejong City Project 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
President Lee Myung-bak, in a Sept. 30 special news conference at 
the Blue House, said that the ROK should present its own visions and 
perspectives regarding not only inter-Korean issues but also other 
international issues, taking a leading role. (All) 
 
Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg told reporters yesterday 
after a meeting with First Vice Foreign Minister Kwon Jong-rak at 
the Foreign Ministry in Seoul that there is no difference of opinion 
between the ROK and the U.S. over the ROK-proposed "grand bargain" 
on North Korea's nuclear issue. He also urged North Korea to seize a 
"tremendous opportunity" and return to the Six-Party Talks. (Chosun, 
JoongAng, Dong-a, Hankook, Segye, Seoul, all TVs) 
 
The Deputy Secretary also said during an interview with JoongAng 
Ilbo that the sanctions against North Korea will remain in place 
until the North takes concrete, irreversible steps to eliminate 
nuclear weapons. (JoongAng) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------------------------- 
 
In what could be viewed as North Korea's first official response to 
President Lee's "grand bargain" proposal, North Korea's Korean 
Central News Agency said yesterday that the nuclear matter is a 
bilateral issue with the U.S. and that the "grand bargain" proposal 
is an attempt to meddle between the North and the U.S. (JoongAng, 
Hankook, Hankyoreh, Segye) 
 
Stephen Bosworth, the U.S. Special Representative for North Korea 
Policy, in a Sept. 28 interview hosted by the East Asia Forum, said: 
"There is no military solution in North Korea's nuclear issue," 
adding: "I will say that we are willing to restart the negotiation 
process." (JoongAng) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
--------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Most ROK media covered yesterday's press remarks by visiting Deputy 
Secretary of State James Steinberg, in which he said: "We've 
indicated that we're prepared to have direct engagement - bilateral 
 
SEOUL 00001572  002 OF 005 
 
 
engagement - with North Korea if it's in aid of bringing North Korea 
back into the Six Party Talks and recommitting to denuclearization. 
... We hope that the North Koreans take advantage of that." 
 
Deputy Secretary Steinberg was further quoted as saying during an 
interview yesterday with right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo: "The 
sanctions against North Korea will remain in place until the North 
takes concrete, irreversible steps to eliminate nuclear weapons." 
 
Most media also noted Deputy Secretary Steinberg's remarks, "There 
is absolutely no difference in our perspective (between Washington's 
'comprehensive approach' and the 'grand bargain' proposed by 
President Lee).  What we need is a comprehensive and definitive 
resolution of the nuclear question.  I think that's what President 
Lee Myung -bak was talking about, that's what we're talking about, 
so I think we are absolutely in sync on this."  Most newspapers 
carried the identical sub-headlines: "Steinberg: 'There is No 
Bilateral Difference on Grand Bargain.'" 
 
Most ROK media reported on North Korea's rejection yesterday of 
President Lee's "grand bargain" proposal on its nuclear issue, 
citing the North's Korean Central News Agency as insisting that the 
nuclear matter is a bilateral issue with the U.S. and that the 
"grand bargain" proposal is an attempt to meddle between the North 
and the U.S. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo quoted Stephen Bosworth, the U.S. 
Special Representative for North Korea Policy, as saying in a Sept. 
28 interview hosted by the East Asia Forum: "There is no military 
solution in North Korea's nuclear issue.  Negotiations are the way 
forward.  I will say that we are willing to restart the negotiation 
process." 
 
With regard to China's recent indication of its intention to provide 
substantial aid to North Korea, conservative Chosun Ilbo 
editorialized: "If North Korea receives massive aid from China and 
rides out its economic emergency, the North would probably continue 
to develop nuclear weapons while outwardly engaging in talks (on its 
denuclearization.) ... If China does not want this to happen, it 
should provide aid to North Korea within the framework of 
international cooperation to deter the North's nuclear 
development." 
 
 
FEATURES 
---------- 
 
STEINBERG: "WE ARE ABSOLUTELY IN SYNC ON THIS (GRAND BARGAIN)" 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 1, 2009, page 4) 
 
By Reporter Lim Min-hyuk 
 
Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg said on September 30, 
"We've lived through the history before of partial measures and 
reversible measures and what we need is a comprehensive and 
definitive resolution.  I think we are absolutely in sync on this 
(grand bargain.)" 
 
During a press interview with reporters following his meeting with 
ROK Vice Foreign Minister Kwon Jong-rak, Steinberg said, "We've 
discussed with our partners here in Japan, Moscow, and Beijing our 
common willingness to engage with North Korea.  We're prepared to 
have direct engagement-bilateral engagement-with North Korea if it's 
in aid of bringing North Korea back into the Six-Party Talks." 
 
The deputy secretary said, "We hope that the North Koreans take 
advantage of that (opportunity for bilateral talks.)"  He added, "I 
think it's important for North Korea to make clear that it's 
prepared to engage on those terms and that, if we find that it's 
productive to pursue that direction, I think we're prepared to do 
it."  Steinberg also noted, "We are deeply committed together, along 
with the other members of the Six-Party Talks, to convincing North 
Korea that they should return to the path of diplomacy through the 
Six-Party Talks and recommit to complete and irreversible 
 
SEOUL 00001572  003 OF 005 
 
 
denuclearization." 
 
Earlier, Deputy Secretary Steinberg had a breakfast meeting with Kim 
Sung-hwan, Senior Presidential Secretary for Diplomacy and National 
Security and Wi Sung-lac, the ROK's Chief Delegate to the Six-Party 
Talks and discussed President Lee Myung-bak's "Grand Bargain" 
proposal and the timing and conditions for U.S.-North Korea 
bilateral talks. 
 
 
STEINBERG: "WE HOPE THAT THE NORTH KOREANS TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THAT 
(OPPORTUNITY FOR BILATERAL TALKS)" 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 1, 2009, page 2: Excerpts) 
 
By Reporters Kim Young-shik and Shin Seok-ho 
 
After a meeting with ROK Vice Foreign Minister Kwon Jong-rak at the 
Foreign Ministry, Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg said on 
September 30, "The challenge now is for the North Koreans to 
understand that there is an opportunity to return to a more 
productive path." 
 
Meanwhile, North Korea issued its first official reaction to 
President Lee Myung-bak's "Grand Bargain" proposal on September 30. 
 
The North's Korean Central News Agency said that it is absurd (for 
the U.S.) to call on the North to give up its nuclear program when 
it remains hostile to Pyongyang. 
 
 
U.S. ENVOY: "SANCTIONS WILL REMAIN IN PLACE UNTIL NORTH KOREANS 
ELIMINATE NUCLEAR WEAPONS" 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 1, 2009, Front page) 
 
By Senior Journalist Kim Young-hie 
 
Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg announced on September 30 
that the U.S. will continue to implement UNSC Resolution 1874 
sanctioning North Korea until the North takes concrete and 
irreversible steps to denuclearize (the Korean Peninsula.) 
Steinberg, a chief official in charge of the Obama Administration's 
North Korea policy, said that the U.S. will not even discuss easing 
sanctions before Pyongyang takes necessary steps. 
 
During an exclusive interview with JoongAng Ilbo, the deputy 
secretary, who is on a tour of three Asian countries including the 
ROK, China and Japan, said that diplomatic moves by the U.S. toward 
talks with North Korea definitely do not represent any shift in its 
position.  He said that the U.S. is strictly enforcing UNSCR 1874 
and will not back off.  Deputy Secretary Steinberg noted that the 
U.S. believes that North Korea has recently made conciliatory 
gestures toward the ROK and the U.S. because sanctions are paying 
off and North Korea realizes that its current direction is isolating 
itself and undermining its security. 
 
Deputy Secretary Steinberg said that there is no conceptual 
difference between the "grand bargain," which President Lee 
Myung-bak proposed in New York on September 16 as a new solution to 
the North Korean nuclear issue, and the Obama Administration's 
"package deal." 
 
 
 
U.S. ENVOY: "THERE WILL BE NO COMPROMISE THAT TOLERATES NORTH 
KOREA'S NUCLEAR POSSESSION" 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 1, 2009, Page 10) 
 
By Senior Journalist Kim Young-hie 
 
An interview with U.S. Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg 
 
Despite a very tight schedule for his seven-day trip to five Asian 
nations, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg did not look 
tired.  During a September 30 interview held at the conference room 
 
SEOUL 00001572  004 OF 005 
 
 
of the U.S. Embassy in Seoul, he sounded firm regarding North Korea. 
 Seemingly mindful of U.S. hard-liners' criticism that (the U.S.) is 
strung along by the North, he strongly emphasized that (the U.S.) 
has no intention of easing sanctions. 
 
Q.  There must have been efforts to coordinate between President Lee 
Myung-bak's "grand bargain" proposal and the Obama Administration's 
"package deal."  How much progress has been made? 
 
"They are all the same concept.  We should take a different approach 
(on the nuclear issue) than in the past, whatever words you use to 
describe that.  There is no difference about that among not only the 
ROK and the U.S. but also other Six-Party nations.  We do not want a 
kind of forward and backward movement." 
 
Q. Then, when President Lee put forward the grand bargain, why did 
the U.S. Department of State react coolly? 
 
"That was not an accurate response." 
 
Q. Did the idea of the grand bargain come out of the ROK-U.S. summit 
last June? 
 
"Yes. As President Lee said, both nations agreed that a "piecemeal" 
approach to resolving the North Korean issue step by step should not 
be the case.  The way of offering rewards to the North for 
incremental progress does not work properly." 
 
Q. North Korean leader Kim Jong-il expressed intent to return to 
multilateral and U.S.-North Korea talks. 
 
"So far, there have been various contacts between Chinese and North 
Korean officials by visiting each other.  We will watch whether 
North Korea sincerely intends to return to dialogue." 
 
Q. Do you think a breakthrough in the North Korean nuclear issue 
will be made at the upcoming ROK-China-Japan summit in Beijing? 
 
"It is up to whether North Korea is ready to make a strategic 
decision.  We are ready.  The door is widely open for the North 
Koreans to walk in.  They can rejoin the Six-Party Talks.  In that 
case, we can discuss more specific details to reach the destination. 
 Kim's strategic decision is required." 
 
Q. What is the strategic decision? 
 
"It is to recognize that North Korea is better off without nuclear 
weapons than with nuclear weapons.  This is the key of the strategic 
decision.  Then, a lot of things become possible." 
 
Q. Do you think it will be helpful to North Korea's denuclearization 
to extend the currently effective sanctions against the North by 
another three or six months? 
 
"We have made it clear that unless the North Koreans take steps 
toward denuclearization, we will not discuss withdrawing sanctions. 
Right now, what we want to talk to them about is not about 
sanctions.  We agreed with other Six-Party countries to maintain UN 
Security Council Resolution 1874.  There is no proposal to ease or 
end the current sanctions against the North." 
 
Q. The "two-track" approach combining both sanctions and dialogue is 
being pursued in a balanced way.  In what situation, will dialogue 
be given more weight? 
 
"We are not going to, as in the past in some cases, give sanctions 
relief for talks.  We need to take note of North Korea's recent 
moves.  They launched missiles, conducted a nuclear test, and, on 
September 3, sent the UN Security Council a letter saying that they 
successfully conducted experimental uranium enrichment.  Therefore, 
in order for the international community to lift the sanctions 
against the North, North Korea has much work to do." 
 
Q. Then, why did you recently veer away from additional sanctions 
 
SEOUL 00001572  005 OF 005 
 
 
toward the pursuit of dialogue? 
 
"We did not change course.  We are firmly enforcing UNSC Resolution 
1874, and we possess every means needed to do so.  Several nations 
have already stopped North Korean vessels.  Yesterday in Beijing, 
too, we discussed the implementation of UNSCR 1874.  We also talked 
about this with the Malaysian Prime Minister." 
 
Q. As a way to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue, do you 
consider tolerating North Korea's nuclear possession on the 
condition that it will not spread its nuclear programs? 
 
"That is one of the few questions to which I can give a simple 
answer.  The answer is 'No.' Such concern is groundless.  We want 
North Korea's irreversible and complete denuclearization." 
 
Q. Does the Iranian nuclear standoff have any impact on the North 
Korean nuclear issue? 
 
"It has much influence.  If we do not stand firm against the North, 
we could send the world a signal that we tacitly approve nuclear 
proliferation.  Although the North Korean issue itself is important, 
we take much interest in the meaning that (the North Korean issue) 
carries in relation to the nuclear non-proliferation regime." 
 
Q. Do you have a contingency plan for a "Big Bang" inside North 
Korea? 
 
"Policymakers should consider various options.  However, it is not 
appropriate to disclose the details." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>