^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL399  |  2009-03-16 06:51  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도 2009년 3월 16일 ======
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도 2009년 3월 16일
미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 000399

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도 2009년 3월 16일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2015/04/25 16:16//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
박연차 ＂검찰·與野의원 등 70여명에 금품 전달＂ 

중앙일보
“사교육 끊자” 엄마 3000명의 힘

동아일보
“한-EU FTA, G20서 타결선언하자”

한국일보
전방위 구조조정 막 올랐다

한겨레 신문
대법조사관 ‘신대법관 면죄부’ 결론 낸 듯’ 오늘 결과 발표…‘부적절했지만 재판개입 아니다’ 법원 내부 반발·재조사 요구 등 ‘후폭풍’ 불가피

세계일보, 서울신문 모든 텔레비전
다주택자 양도세 중과 없앤다
===== 국내 동향 =====

북한이 어제까지 3일 연속으로 개성공단 통행을 차단하면서 726명의 개성공단 노동자를 비롯해 761명의 한국인이 북한에 발이 묶여 있다. (모든 신문)

주요 한국 정부 관리에 의하면 한국 정부가 '무노동 무임금" 원칙을 개성공단 북한 근로자에게 적용하는 등 한국이 북한의 움직임에 대한 다양한 대응 조치를 검토하고 있다. 이는 통행차단 조치로 개성공단 조업이 어려워지면 북한도 손해를 입는다는 것을 인식시킬 필요가 있다는 판단에 따른 것이다. (조선)

72개 개성공단 입주 업체는 만일 통행 차단이 (3월 15일 일요일을 기점으로) 6일이 넘게 계속될 경우 가스와 식량과 기타 원자제 공급 제한으로 인해 생산을 중단할 수밖에 없다고 우려하고 있다. (모든 신문)
국제 뉴스
의회 조사국 (CRS)의 최근 보고서에 의하면 북한은 2007년 비핵화 원조 거래 약속에 따른 군축 의무를 이행하려는 노력의 일환으로 주요 영변 핵 시설에서 8000개의 사용후 연료봉 중 6100개를 제거하였다. (중앙일보)
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

조선일보는 북한이 다음달 4월 4~8일 "인공위성"을 발사할 계획을 국제 기구뿐만 아니라 미국에도 통보했다는 보도를 (3월 14일) 토요일 판 내부 지면에 실었다. 조선일보는 또 별도의 보도에서 오바마 정부가 더는 북한이 발사한 미사일을 요격할 수 있다는 언급을 하지 않는 등 대북 공세의 수위를 낮추고 있다고 전했다. 조선일보는 "美, 대북공세 수위 약화 요격 얘기 쏙 들어가 '양자회담 준비' 수순?"이라는 제하의 기사를 실었다.

대다수 한국 매체는 만일 북한이 통지한 바대로 인공위성을 실은 로켓 발사에 성공한다면 로켓 사거리가 4000㎞에 달할 거라며 한미일 3국은 인공위성을 가장한 미사일로 판단, 북한의 로켓 발사를 저지하기 위해 외교 총력전을 벌어지고 있다고 토요일에 보도했다. 오바마 대통령이 북한의 미사일 계획의 위험성을 경고하는 성명을 3월 12일 발표했다고 널리 인용되고 있다.

<wrap hi>중앙일보는 북한이 로켓 발사를 강행할 경우 대북 제재 결정 여부는 중국과 러시아의 협력에 달려 있다고 평가했다.</wrap> 중앙일보 사설을 보면: "북한의 미사일 실험은 동북아 전체의 안보 균형을 뒤흔들 것이다. 우선 일본의 안보 불안감을 크게 자극할 것이 분명하다. 1998년 북한이 일본열도 위를 지나가는 로켓을 발사한 뒤 일본은 전국이 들끓었다. 이를 빌미로 일본의 우파 세력들은 군사력 강화 필요성을 소리쳐 주장했고, 그에 발맞춰 실제 군비 증강 작업이 착착 진행됐다. 이번에도 같은 일이 벌어질 것이다. 일본 극우파들이 북한의 미사일 시험 발사를 오히려 환영한다는 말이 괜한 소리가 아닌 것이다."<WRAP center round info 90%>//**마이클 그린 전 백악관 국가안보회의 보좌관 발언이 중앙일보의 평가?!**//
(아들 부시의 안보 보좌관이 기고한 글을 가지고 중앙일보의 평가라니… 미 대사관 가끔 이런 짓도 한다.)((역주: 기사 검색해 보면 제재 운운하는 당일 기사는 이것뿐이다)) …(상략) 한·미·일 3국은 미사일 발사가 유엔 안보리 결의 1695호를 위반하는 것이란 점을 분명히 하고 있다. 반면 중국과 러시아의 입장은 명확하지 않다. 오히려 평화적 인공위성 발사라는 북한의 주장에 귀를 기울이는 모습이다. [[http://article.joins.com/news/article/article.asp?total_id=3528349&ctg=|[투데이] 북한 미사일 사태와 한·미·일 공조]]
</WRAP>

한국 미디어는 오늘 3일째 계속되는 북한의 통행 차단을 크게 다루며 726명의 개성공단 노동자를 비롯해 761명이 북한에 발이 묶었다고 보도했다.

조선일보는 한국 정부 관리의 말을 빌어 '무노동 무임금" 원칙을 개성공단 북한 근로자에게 적용하는 등 한국이 북한의 움직임에 대한 다양한 대응 조치를 검토하고 있다고 보도했다. 이는 통행차단 조치로 개성공단 조업이 어려워지면 북한도 손해를 입는다는 것을 인식시킬 필요가 있다는 판단에 따른 것이다. 대다수 한국 신문은 북한의 개성공단 통행 차단을 비난하는 사설을 실었다. 동아일보의 주장이 눈에 띈다: "국민의 안전이 확보되지 않은 상태에서 개성공단을 존속시킬 수는 없다. 정부는 차제에 근본 대책을 세워야 한다. 정치적 군사적 긴장완화가 전제되지 않는 교류협력사업은 이처럼 언제든 위험에 빠질 수 있다. 북이 당장 통행을 정상화하고 확실한 안전보장책을 내놓지 않는다면 공단을 포기할 수도 있다는 각오를 보여야 한다. 국제사회도 민간인들을 볼모로 삼는 북의 실체를 정확히 알고 대처해야 한다." 한겨레는 "북한의 도 넘은 개성공단 통행차단"제하의 사설을 실었다.
==== G20 재무장관 회담 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 4월 2일 영국 G20 정상회담을 앞두고 의제를 조율하기 위해 오늘 G20(주요 20개국) 재무장관과 중앙은행 총재들이 14일 영국에서 회의를 갖고 "모든 형태의 보호주의"를 배격하기로 약속했다고 보도했다. 조선일보는 "세계 경제의 성장세 회복을 위해 필요한 모든 조치를 취하고 모든 형태의 보호무역주의에 맞서 싸울것"이라고 공언한 G20 재무장관과 중앙은행 총재 등이 발표한 공동성명 내용에 모호한 부분이 많고 구체적인 행동계획이 빠져 있어 G20 포럼의 효용성이 의문시되고 있다고 평했다.
===== 사설 =====

우리에게 6자회담은 무엇인가
김대중 주필

<del>북한의 김정일 집단은 정말 이해할 수가 없다. 미국과의 관계개선을 그렇게 원하면서, 그 개선의 기회가 왔는데 그것을 여지없이 걷어차는 북한 당국의 처사는 어떻게 설명해야 하는 것인가? 가능한 해설은 세 가지다. 아주 머리가 나쁘거나, 아니면 고도의 전략을 숨긴 것이거나, 그도 저도 아니면 북한 내부의 사정이 심상치 않다는 것이다.

미국의 민주당 정부가 출범하면서 오바마 대통령은 일단 북한 등에 대화의 손길을 내밀었다. 오바마는 취임 초 '오바마-바이든 플랜'에서 우방과 적 모든 나라의 지도자들과 협상테이블에 나설 용의를 천명한 바 있다. 이미 8년 전 클린턴 정부의 말기에 클린턴의 방북을 포함해 미·북 관계개선에 앞장섰던 한반도 전문가들이 다시 오바마의 진영에 모였다는 것만으로도 오바마 정부의 연성(軟性)접근법은 분명했다. 국무부의 아인혼, 포니만, 보즈워스, 백악관의 세이모어 등이 그들이다. 그들은 미국이 북한을 더 빨리 다스리지 못해 북한으로 하여금 핵개발의 시간만 벌어준 꼴이라는 주장을 가진 사람들이다.

그런 미국에다 대고 북한은 뒤통수를 쳤다. 상대방의 새 정부가 호의적 제스처를 취했으면 그 귀추를 보면서 상응하는 대응을 하는 것이 상대방에 대한 대접(?)이며 상식이다. 한국을 경유해 북한행(行)을 기다리고 있던 보즈워스 특사의 방북도 보기 좋게 무산시켰다. 그들이 발사 예정인 미사일 (또는 인공위성 발사체)을 요격하면 전쟁으로 간주하겠다며 으름장까지 놓았다. 또 개성공단에 출입하는 한국의 인력(人力)을 수시로 차단하며 '인질'의 공포분위기까지 조성했다.
이것은 누가 보더라도 관계개선을 도모하려는 외교적 전술이 아니다. 지금까지 북한의 김정일 집단이 보여왔던 외교적 능력은 그것이 '벼랑끝 전술'이건, '깡패외교'건 그 나름대로 패턴을 특징으로 했다. 그런데 지금의 북한 처사는 미국에 새 정부가 들어서면서 얻을 수 있는 모처럼의 기회를 걷어차는 듯한, 일탈의 조짐마저 보이고 있다.

일부 해설자들은 북한의 처사를 이해할 수 없는 나머지, 북한이 미국과의 협상에서 유리한 위치를 차지하고 협상의 메뉴를 더 추가함으로써 값을 올리려는 전략으로 애써 분석하기도 한다. 그러나 이것은 오바마와 일합(一合)도 견주어보기 전에 선제적으로 취할 태도가 아니며, 대화의 진전 여부에 따라 취해도 늦지 않다는 점에서 하수(下手) 중의 하수다.

결국 북한이 오바마를 상대로 취하고 있는 위협과 공포분위기 조성 전략은 북한의 외교를 총괄하는 두뇌에 고장이 생겼음을 가늠케 한다. 어쩌면 두뇌에 이상이 생겼다기보다 북한 내부의 상황, 즉 심장에 문제가 발생했는지도 모를 일이다. 특히 그동안 선군(先軍)정치가 북한의 통치모드로 확립된 가운데서도 되도록 '대외'에 모습을 드러내지 않아왔던 북한의 군부가 근자에 텔레비전 등에 세 차례나 직접 '군복'의 위용을 과시하고 있는 점을 우리는 예의 주시할 필요가 있다.)</del>

이제 우리의 관심사는 ①북한이 과연 대내외에 과시한 대로 미사일을 쏠 것인가와 ②발사 이후 미국이 이에 어떻게 대응할 것인가로 모아진다. 북한이 마지막 단계에서 미사일 발사를 중지할 '묘수'는 아직 남아있다. 그렇게 함으로써 자신의 능력은 과시하고 미국의 화해 내지 대화노력에 극적으로 부응하면서 허(虛)를 찔러 세계의 이목을 끄는 고도의 전술을 구사하는 것이다. 미·북의 급속한 정상화는 한국내 친북좌파를 기승하게 하는 파장을 몰고 올 것이다. 

북한이 미사일 시험발사에 성공한 뒤에도 미국이 그 제재에 미온적일 경우, 우리가 취할 태도는 참 어렵고 찜찜하다. 한때 북한 미사일 '요격'을 거론해오던 미국 정부에서 요즘 '요격' 얘기가 쑥 들어간 점, 데니스 블레어 군사정보국장이 '인공위성 발사체'라는 데 힘을 보태준 점이 심상치 않다. 전문가들은 미국이 북한 제재를 결의한 유엔 1718호를 가동하는 데 과연 적극적일지에 관해서도 장담하지 못하고 있다. 그럴 경우 이명박 정부는 난관에 봉착할 수밖에 없다. 한국이 미국과의 공조없이 독자적으로 취할 수 있는 효과적 방법이 별로 없고 국내의 대북지원 압력은 더욱 거세질 것이기 때문이다. 마치 오늘의 상황이 이명박 정부의 대북원칙론 때문이라는 좌파들의 선전공세가 드세질 것이다.

그러나 마지노선(線)은 있다. 우리는 북핵이 어떤 형태로든 존재하는 어떤 타협에도 동의할 수 없다, 북핵제거의 대가를 한국이 전담하는 상황도 받아들일 수 없다는 선을 분명히 그으며 6자회담 탈퇴의 배수진까지 쳐야 하는 상황도 대비해야 한다. 6자회담은 미·북의 양자 접근을 가려주는 위장막일 뿐이며, 한국이 아무런 실속없이 그 위장막의 한자락을 언제까지 맡고 있어야 하는지도 이제는 점차 불확실해지는 상황이기 때문이다.

[사설]安全 확보 안 되면 개성공단 존속시킬 수 없다

북한이 개성공단 통행 차단을 해제한 지 사흘 만인 13일 또다시 아무런 설명도 없이 통행을 막아 북에 체류 중인 우리 국민 727명이 나흘째 사실상 억류된 상태다. 개성공단을 이용해 자신들의 입맛대로 남북관계를 요리할 의도라면 착각이다. 그럴수록 북에 대한 우리 국민과 세계의 반감만 커질 뿐이다. 그에 따른 손실도 결국 북이 떠안게 된다.

북한은 개성공단을 열면서 ‘통행 통신 통관의 군사적 보장’과 ‘남측 인원의 출입 체류 신변안전 보장’에 합의했다. 2002년 북한 국내법인 개성공업지구법까지 만들어 투자가의 권리 및 이익 보호도 약속했다. 그러고선 남북 합의의 일방적 파기도 모자라 스스로 만든 법까지 지키지 않으니 누가 북을 신뢰하고, 경제협력 사업을 더불어 하고 싶겠는가. 북은 지금 제 발등을 찍고 있다. 

폐쇄경제는 자멸을 재촉할 뿐이다. 정부는 북측에 즉각 통행 정상화를 촉구했지만 우선은 북의 처분에 맡겨야 하는 현실이 안타깝다. 북측의 통행 차단 조치가 1주일만 더 계속돼도 개성공단 입주기업 10곳 중 9곳이 가동 중단의 위기에 처할 것이라고 한다. 이런 상황을 초래한 원죄는 햇볕정책에 취해 국민의 안전은 아랑곳하지 않은 채 실적 과시에 급급했던 김대중, 노무현 정권에 있다. 두 정권은 금강산관광과 개성공단 사업을 햇볕정책의 최대 성과로 자랑했지만 금강산관광은 북한군의 남한 관광객 사살로 8개월째 중단 상태에 있고, 개성공단은 북의 정치적 볼모로 전락했다.

야당과 친북, 종북(從北)세력은 이 모든 게 햇볕정책을 계승하지 않은 이명박 정권 탓이라는 북의 주장을 앵무새처럼 되뇌고 있다. 북의 미사일 발사 위협 앞에서도 남북 경협과 교류사업의 지속을 위해 노력하는 우리 정부에 책임을 뒤집어씌우는 것은 억지다. 그런 왜곡된 주장이 바로 북이 노리는 바다. 남남갈등이 격화돼 정부가 다시 무릎을 꿇고 나오기를 북은 기다리는 것이다.

국민의 안전이 확보되지 않은 상태에서 개성공단을 존속시킬 수는 없다. 정부는 차제에 근본 대책을 세워야 한다. 정치적 군사적 긴장완화가 전제되지 않는 교류협력사업은 이처럼 언제든 위험에 빠질 수 있다. 북이 당장 통행을 정상화하고 확실한 안전보장책을 내놓지 않는다면 공단을 포기할 수도 있다는 각오를 보여야 한다. 국제사회도 민간인들을 볼모로 삼는 북의 실체를 정확히 알고 대처해야 한다.

* 이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.

[사설] 북 미사일은 일본 군사 대국화 빌미만 줄 뿐(중앙일보 2009년 3월 14일 30면)

북한이 12일 국제해사기구(IMO)와 국제민간항공기구(ICAO)에 ‘광명성 2호’ 인공위성 발사 일정을 통보했다. 미국을 겨냥한 대륙간 탄도탄(ICBM) 수준의 미사일 기술을 갖고 있음을 우회적으로 과시하려는 뜻이다. 우리는 물론 미국·일본·중국·러시아 및 유엔 등 국제사회 전체가 우려하며 반대의 뜻을 밝혔으나 북한은 전혀 아랑곳하지 않고 있다. 최근 한 달여 진행돼 온 외교적 설득 노력이 아무런 성과를 얻지 못하면서 위기가 고조되고 있다.

북한의 미사일 실험은 동북아 전체의 안보 균형을 뒤흔들 것이다. 우선 일본의 안보 불안감을 크게 자극할 것이 분명하다. 1998년 북한이 일본열도 위를 지나가는 로켓을 발사한 뒤 일본은 전국이 들끓었다. 

이를 빌미로 일본의 우파 세력들은 군사력 강화 필요성을 소리쳐 주장했고, 그에 발맞춰 실제 군비 증강 작업이 착착 진행됐다. 이번에도 같은 일이 벌어질 것이다. 일본 극우파들이 북한의 미사일 시험 발사를 오히려 환영한다는 말이 괜한 소리가 아닌 것이다.

일본은 1998년 사태를 계기로 미국 주도의 미사일 방어(MD)체제에 적극 참여하고 있다. 일본은 현재까진 방어 능력 강화에 초점을 맞춰 군비를 강화하고 있지만 앞으론 그 성격 자체가 달라질 수 있다. 일본엔 이미 ‘평화헌법’을 수정해 세계 2위의 경제력에 걸맞은 군사력을 갖춰야 한다는 ‘보통국가론’이 팽배한 상태다. ‘보통국가론’엔 공격 능력을 갖춘 군사강국이 되고 싶다는 속내가 담겨 있다. 북한의 미사일 발사는 일본 우파의 ‘군사 대국화’ 주장을 결정적으로 뒷받침할 것이다.

일본의 군사 대국화는 필연적으로 중국과 러시아를 자극하게 된다. 우리도 예외가 아니다. 북한에도 부메랑이 될 것이 분명하다. 강대국들의 군비경쟁은 그들 서로에게도 큰 부담이지만 우리나 북한엔 재앙이다. 강대국들 사이에서 군비경쟁에 가담하는 것은 ‘뱁새가 황새를 좇는 격’이기 때문이다. 북한 미사일은 동북아 국가들이 평화롭게 상호 번영하는 기회를 가로막고 있다. 북한은 자충수(自充手)일 뿐인 미사일 발사 놀음을 당장 중단해야 한다.

* 이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.

[사설] 정부, 북(北) 도발에 속수무책 당하기만 할 건가(조선일보 2009년 3월 16일 35면)

북한이 지난 13일부터 사흘째 개성공단에 체류 중인 우리 국민 720여명을 사실상 억류하고 있다. 앞서 12일엔 장거리 미사일 발사실험인 '위성 발사'를 4월 4~8일 사이에 하겠다고 국제기구에 통보했다. 북한은 작년 가을부터 육·해·공에 걸친 도발 위협을 계속하고 있다. 

작년 말 남북 당국간 대화 채널을 끊고, 개성관광과 경의선 운행을 중단시켰고, 올 들어선 서해 북방한계선(NLL)에 대한 공갈을 늘어놓고, 기존 남북간 각종 합의를 무효화한다고 선언했고, 비무장지대 충돌 운운하더니 "동해상 민항기 안전을 보장 못한다"는 협박을 늘어놓았다.

하루가 멀다고 계속되는 북한 협박에 대해 우리 정부는 "당분간 지켜보자"는 것 말고는 뚜렷한 방안을 내놓지 못하고 있다. 북한이 사흘 동안 개성공단 남측 관계자 720여명을 억류한 것은 우리 국민의 안전을 위협하는 심각한 도발이다. 이에 대해 정부가 취한 조치는 조속한 귀환 허용을 촉구하는 메시지를 북측에 전달하고 항의와 유감의 뜻을 밝힌 것이 전부다. 국민 720여명이 개성에 발이 묶여 있는 상황이라 조심스러울 수밖에 없고 남북관계에서 개성공단이 갖는 상징적 의미 때문에 선택의 폭이 좁다는 정부의 고민을 이해 못하는 것은 아니다.

그러나 이번 사태는 어느 정도 예견됐던 일이다. 북한은 지난 10일 1차로 개성공단 관계자들의 귀환을 막았다가 하루 만에 풀어줬다. 작년 말엔 개성공단에 체류하는 정부측 인사들을 모두 내쫓았다. 남측 인사들의 안전과 운명이 아무 대책 없이 북측 손에 맡겨진 상태였다. 

정부는 '만일의 경우'에 충분히 대비한 모습을 보여줬어야 한다. 지난 11일 1차 억류가 풀린 직후라도 북측에 재발 방지 약속 없이는 개성공단 출입을 허용할 수 없다는 점을 분명히 했다면 적어도 13일 2차 억류사태가 벌어지지 않았을 수 있다.

북한 장거리 미사일 발사도 북한 처분만 기다리는 듯한 상황이 벌어지고 있다. 북한이 미사일 발사를 '위성 발사'라고 주장하면서 시기까지 통보하자 "위성 발사를 막을 방법이 마땅치 않다"는 식의 패배적 발상이 정부 곳곳에서 나오고 있다고 한다. 

그러나 지난 2월 초 미사일 발사 조짐을 처음 포착한 이후 정부는 오바마 미국 정부와 더불어 이를 외교적으로 저지하기 위한 국제공조 노력을 기울여 왔다. 북한이 이런 외교적 압박에 아랑곳 않는 것은 그간의 한·미 정부 노력을 우습게 여기게 됐거나 북한이 두려워할 만한 결연함이 부족했다는 이야기다.

최근 한·미는 '정보 공유'를 놓고 갈등을 빚는 것으로 보도됐다. 미국측이 한국 쪽에서 계속 기밀정보가 새어 나간다고 의심하면서 북한 관련 정보 공유에 소극적이라고 한다. 이런 상황이니 대북 공조가 제대로 돌아갈 리 없다. 정부는 각종 북한 도발에 속수무책 당하는 것이 아니라 충분히 대비하고 있다는 믿음을 국민에게 줘야 한다.

* 이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.

[사설] 북한의 도 넘은 개성공단 통행차단(한겨레 신문 2009년 3월 16일 23면)

북한이 지난 13일부터 남쪽 사람들의 개성공단 왕래를 다시 차단한 것은 용납될 수 없다. 북쪽의 자의적 결정에 따라 이런 일이 되풀이된다면 개성공단 사업의 앞날은 불투명해질 수밖에 없다. 개성공단에 투자한 남쪽 기업들은 이미 부정적 영향을 받고 있다.

북쪽의 이번 조처는 ‘개성공업지구와 금강산관광지구 출입 및 체류에 관한 합의서’ 등 남북 사이 합의서에 정면으로 위배된다. 북쪽 스스로 만든 개성공업지구법에도 어긋난다. 남북 경제협력의 정신을 손상시키고 남쪽의 대북 여론을 악화시키는 것은 물론이다. 북쪽은 지난 9일 개성공단 통행을 하루 동안 차단하면서 한-미 키리졸브 합동군사연습을 이유로 들었다. 이 연습에 불만이 있다고 해서 개성공단 사업을 흔드는 것은 결코 정당화될 수 없다. 남북 경협의 모델인 개성공단이 실패한다면 어느 나라도 북쪽을 믿고 투자하려 하지 않을 것이다.

지금 북쪽이 해야 할 일은 분명하다. 우선 당장 남쪽 사람과 물자가 자유롭게 왕래할 수 있도록 해야 한다. 아울러 이번과 같은 일이 재발하지 않을 것임을 남쪽을 비롯해 지구촌 전체에 확신시켜야 한다. 통행이 풀리더라도 개성공단 업체들의 불안감은 가시지 않을 것이다. 이들이 안심하고 일하도록 여건을 조성하는 것은 북쪽의 기본적 책임이다. 

<del>정치·군사적 이유로 개성공단을 볼모로 삼는 일은 이번이 마지막이 돼야 한다.</del> 정부는 이번 사태가 최대한 빨리 풀리도록 효과적으로 대처해야 한다. 비현실적 낙관론에 기대어 안이하게 대응하거나 과도한 반응으로 사태를 더 악화시켜서는 안 된다. 이번 기회에 대북 정책에 대한 전반적 재검토도 필요하다. 이번 사태의 배경에는 이명박 정부 출범 이후 지속적으로 나빠진 남북 관계가 있고, 수시로 벌어지는 일을 ‘관리한다’는 자세로는 근본적 한계가 있기 때문이다. 키리졸브 연습은 20일 끝나지만 지금처럼 남북 사이 신뢰가 부족하다면 비슷한 일이 언제든지 다시 벌어질 수 있다. 북쪽이 왜 유독 올해 한-미 군사연습에 예민하게 반응하는지를 정부는 잘 생각해봐야 한다.

이제까지 진행된 것만으로도 개성공단 사업은 많은 상처를 입었다. 개성공단이 이런 식으로 뉴스의 초점이 되는 것은 남북 모두에게 아무런 도움이 되지 않는다. 남북의 올바른 판단과 대화가 시급한 상황이다. 

* 이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.
===== 특집 =====

미국 갔던 유학생들 ‘쓸쓸한 U턴’(동아일보 2009년 3월 14일, 11면)
하태원, 이기홍 워싱턴 특파원

전문직 취업비자(H-1B)를 취득해 미국 보스턴의 정보통신업체에서 2년간 근무하던 조모 씨(39)는 최근 평소처럼 출근해 컴퓨터를 켰다가 인사담당관으로부터 해고통지 e메일을 받았다.

짐을 싸서 사무실을 떠나야 하는 시간은 해고통보 당일 오후 5시까지로 정해졌다. 

조 씨는 “짐을 싸는 동안 인사담당관이 내 자리 주변에서 나를 지켜봤다. 혹시 컴퓨터에서 기밀문서라도 빼 갈까봐 감시하는 것 같아 기분이 정말 나빴다”고 말했다. 

미국 유수의 경영대학원을 나와 월가 취업을 꿈꿨던 홍모 씨(28)에게도 지난 몇 달간은 악몽의 연속이었다. 

대학 졸업 후 임시 취업이 가능한 현장실습(OPT) 신분으로 뉴욕 헤지펀드에서 근무하면서 H-1B비자 스폰서를 약속 받았지만 경기침체로 흐지부지된 것. 결국 그는 1년의 OPT 기간을 마치고 최근 한국행 비행기에 몸을 실어야 했다.

경기침체로 미국에서 한국 유학생 등 외국인 전문인력이 설자리를 잃어가고 있다.

미국 기업들은 매년 12만 명의 외국인 전문인력에게 H-1B를 발급해 주고 있지만 매년 지원자가 100만 명을 넘을 정도로 H-1B 취득의 길은 멀고도 험하다. 게다가 버락 오바마 대통령 취임 이후 부실자산 구제 프로그램(TARP)의 발효는 외국인 취업의 기회를 더욱 줄여 놓았다. 

TARP는 정부의 자금을 받은 기업이 외국인을 고용할 경우 미국인에게 일자리를 우선 제공하려고 노력했다는 사실과 함께 해당 외국인이 특정 업무에 가장 적합한 사람이라는 것을 소명케 하고 있다. 

하버드대, 펜실베이니아대 등의 경영대학원 취업센터는 최근 외국인 학생들에게 보낸 공문을 통해 이 같은 내용을 전하면서 “경제난으로 미국 기업이 제시한 취업 제의가 취소될 가능성이 있음을 유념하라”고 밝혔다. 

뉴욕의 한 대학원을 내년 봄에 졸업하는 변모 씨(33)는 요즘 발을 동동 구르고 있다. 해외유학생 채용에 비교적 관대했던 GE, AMEX 등이 올해부터 인턴 채용 기준을 영주권자 또는 시민권자로 제한해 버린 것. 

<del>변 씨는 “원서 제출조차 하지 못하게 한 것은 외국인들의 현지 취업을 사실상 봉쇄하겠다는 의도”라며 한숨을 쉬었다.</del> 궁여지책으로 학교로 돌아가는 경우도 속출하고 있다. 조지워싱턴대에서 경영학 석사(MBA) 학위를 받은 김모 씨(31)는 취업비자 스폰서를 구하기 힘들어 조지타운대 대학원에서 정보기술(IT) 분야를 다시 공부하기로 했다.

일부 유학생은 논문 제출을 미루는 방법으로 비싼 학비를 감수하고 유학생 신분을 더 유지하기도 한다. 박사학위 논문 마무리 작업 중인 양모 씨(36·버지니아 주 거주)는 “한 학기 정도 더 유학생 신분을 유지할 계획”이라고 말했다.

한미 자유무역협정(FTA)의 발효 지연도 취업을 꿈꾸는 한국인들을 좌절시키고 있다. 한미 FTA에는 연간 H-1B 발급 한도와는 별도로 한국인들에게 취업비자를 할당할 수 있는 길을 열어 두었기 때문.

미국 내에서는 본국으로 돌아가는 외국인 전문인력이 늘어나고 있는 데 우려의 목소리가 커지고 있다. 
워싱턴포스트는 최근 “재능 있는 젊은 외국인들이 떠나는 것은 혁신의 씨앗이 송두리째 유출되는 것이다”라고 지적했다.

* 이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다. 
===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL399.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 000399 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; March 16, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Taekwang Industrial Chairman Park Yeon-cha Gave Money and Other 
Things of Value to Some 70 Prosecutors and Ruling 
and Opposition Lawmakers 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
"Mom School" Warns about Overreliance on Private Education 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
EU Proposes Concluding ROK-EU FTA at April 2 
G20 Summit in London 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Conglomerates Face Restructuring; 
ROK Lenders Set to Review Overall Health of Conglomerates Starting 
This Week 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Supreme Court Justice Shin Young-chul Likely to be Cleared of 
Influencing Trials of Anti-U.S. Beef Protestors through a Series of 
Emails to Junior Judges Involved in the Cases 
 
Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
Multiple Homeowners to Get Tax Cut 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
North Korea kept the inter-Korean border closed for the third 
consecutive day yesterday, stranding 761 ROK people in the North, 
including 726 workers at the Kaesong Industrial Complex. (All) 
 
According to a key ROKG official, the ROKG is reviewing various 
countermeasures against the North Korean move, including applying 
the principle of "no work, no pay" to North Korean workers at the 
Kaesong Complex, in the judgment that Pyongyang needs to understand 
that any disruption to the operation of the joint industrial complex 
will also hurt North Korea. (Chosun) 
 
72 ROK companies operating in the Kaesong Complex are concerned that 
they would have to stop production if the closure continues for more 
than six days (starting Sunday, March 15), due to a limited supply 
of gas, food and other raw materials. (All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to a recent report by the Congressional Research Service 
(CRS), North Korea has removed 6,100 out of its 8,000 used fuel rods 
from its main Yongbyon nuclear facility in an effort to meet 
disarmament obligations it promised under a 2007 
denuclearization-for-aid deal. (JoongAng) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-North Korea 
---------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo on Saturday (March 14) carried an inside-page report 
noting that North Korea informed not only international agencies but 
also the U.S. of its plan to launch a "satellite" between April 4 
and 8.  In a separate report, Chosun also observed that the Obama 
Administration is toning down its offensive against North Korea, 
including no longer mentioning the possibility of intercepting a 
missile launched by North Korea.   Chosun headlined its story: "Is 
 
SEOUL 00000399  002 OF 007 
 
 
U.S. Taking Steps for Bilateral Talks with North Korea?" 
 
Most of the ROK media reported on Saturday that if North Korea is 
successful in launching a rocket carrying a satellite as it 
mentioned in its notification, the rocket will have a range of up to 
4,000 kilometers and this is prompting the ROK, the U.S. and Japan 
to engage in all-out diplomatic efforts to deter the North Korean 
launch, which they see as a disguised missile test.  President 
Barack Obama was widely quoted as issuing a statement on March 12 
warning of risks posed by North Korea's missile plans. 
 
JoongAng Ilbo commented that the decision whether to impose 
sanctions against North Korea if it goes ahead with the launch 
hinges on cooperation from China and Russia.  JoongAng also 
editorialized: "The North's missile experiment will shake the 
balance of security over all of Northeast Asia.  First of all, it 
will stir Japan's anxiety over safety.  In 1998 Japan seethed at the 
North's launch of a rocket that flew over the Japanese islands. 
Because of the launch, right-wing forces in Japan easily called for 
enhancement of military capacity and such capacity was, indeed, 
boosted.  The same will happen this time too if the North goes ahead 
with its plan.  That's why some say right-wingers in Japan would 
welcome North Korea's missile test-launch." 
 
The ROK media today gave prominent play to North Korea's closure of 
the inter-Korean border for the third consecutive day, stranding 761 
ROK people in the North, including 726 workers at the Kaesong 
Industrial Complex. 
 
Citing a key ROKG official, Chosun reported that Seoul is reviewing 
various countermeasures against the North Korean move, including 
applying the principle of "no work, no pay" to North Korean workers 
at the Kaesong industrial complex, in the judgment that Pyongyang 
needs to understand that any disruption to the operation of the 
joint industrial complex will also hurt North Korea.  Most of the 
ROK newspapers carried editorials condemning the North's closure of 
the inter-Korean border.  Dong-a Ilbo, in particular, argued: "The 
Kaesong Complex cannot continue to run without assurances for the 
safety of ROK workers.  Seoul needs to come up with fundamental 
solutions this time.  With no prospects of political and military 
dtente between the two Koreas, bilateral economic cooperation 
projects could derail at any time.  Unless Pyongyang immediately 
reopens the border and provides a strong security guarantee, Seoul 
should make it clear that it can give up the Kaesong complex 
altogether.  The international community should deal with the 
civilian-threatening North with a clear understanding of its true 
intentions."  Hankyoreh Shinmun headlined its editorial: "North 
Korea Goes to Extremes in Border Closure." 
 
-G20 Minister's Meeting 
---------------------- 
 
Most of the ROK media reported today that finance ministers and the 
heads of central banks of the G20 pledged to fight "all forms of 
protectionism" during a March 14 meeting in London to coordinate 
agendas in advance of the G20 Summit in London on April 2.  Chosun 
Ilbo commented that the finance ministers and the heads of central 
banks issued a joint statement vowing to take all necessary measures 
to enable the global economy to recover and to fight trade 
protectionism but that the forum's effectiveness is being questioned 
since the joint statement includes many ambiguous points and lacks a 
concrete action plan. 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
What Does Six-Party Talks Mean to Us 
(Chosun Ilbo, March 16, 2009, Page 34) 
 
By Advisor Kim Dae-joong 
 
These days, we are turning our attention to whether North Korea will 
go ahead with a missile launch and how the U.S. will respond to it. 
 
SEOUL 00000399  003 OF 007 
 
 
North Korea should make a brilliant option to pull the plug on its 
plan for a missile launch even though it is in the final stage of 
preparation.  This would allow North Korea to cooperate with U.S. 
efforts toward reconciliation and dialogue, while showing off its 
power at the same time.  By deploying these unexpected tactics, 
North Korea would grab more of the world's attention than its 
professed missile launch.  Moreover, if this happens, negotiations 
between the U.S. and North Korea would accelerate and play out in 
favor of North Korea.  This would lead to quick normalization of 
U.S.-North Korea ties and cause pro-North Korea leftists to reign in 
Korea. 
 
If the U.S. half-heartedly pursues sanctions even after North Korea 
makes a successful missile launch, we would find ourselves in an 
awkward position.  There have been some worrying signs.   The U.S. 
government stopped talking about its plan to intercept a missile 
from the North, and U.S. National Intelligence Director Dennis Blair 
acknowledged that North Korea is planning to launch a satellite. 
Experts are not sure whether the U.S. would aggressively seek to 
implement U.N. (Security Council) Resolution 1718 that calls for 
sanctions against North Korea.  If the U.S. takes a lukewarm 
attitude, the Lee Myung-bak Administration would inevitably hit a 
snag.  This is because there will be few effective options for the 
ROK to employ unilaterally without U.S. cooperation, and domestic 
voices calling for aid to the North will grow louder.  Leftists will 
increase their propaganda offensive, saying that today's situation 
is attributable to the Lee Myung-bak Administration's principled 
stance on North Korea. 
 
However, we have the Maginot line.  We should make it clear that we 
will not agree to any compromise that  would allow any form of a 
North Korean nuclear program to exist and that we will not bear the 
entire price for eliminating North Korea's nuclear programs. 
Otherwise, we should even start considering whether to withdraw from 
the Six-Party Talks.  The reason (for considering a withdrawal from 
the Six Party Talks) is that the Six-Party Talks are only a cover 
for bilateral contact between the U.S. and North Korea, and we do 
not know how long we have to remain involved in this situation 
without receiving anything in return. 
 
 
Safety Guarantees Needed at Kaesong Complex 
 (Dong-a Ilbo, March 16, 2009, Page 31) 
 
North Korea closed its border on Friday without explanation just 
three days after it had reopened it.  As a result, 727 South Koreans 
have been stranded in the North for four days.  Pyongyang is making 
a huge mistake, however, if it believes it can leverage the 
inter-Korean industrial complex in Kaesong to get its way.  Its 
erratic behavior will only invite a backlash from South Korea and 
the world, and Pyongyang will be left alone to suffer all the 
consequences. 
 
North Korea has consented to an agreement to ensure access, 
communication and customs clearance, and another to guarantee the 
safety of South Korean workers entering and residing at the complex. 
 Pyongyang also promised to protect the rights and interests of 
investors by enacting a civil law on governing the complex in 2002. 
Unfortunately the North broke the pact with South Korea and also 
violated its self-imposed law.  Under such circumstances, no one can 
trust North Korea and engage in economic cooperation with it.  The 
North is hastening its own demise with a closed economy. 
 
The South Korean government delivered a verbal message urging an 
immediate reopening of the border.  The ball is in North Korea's 
court, however, and this is lamentable.  Fundamentally, former 
Presidents Kim Dae-jung and Roh Moo-hyun should take responsibility 
for the latest incident for their indulgence in the "sunshine 
policy" that prioritized ostensible improvement in inter-Korean 
relations over South Koreans' safety.  They consider the Mount 
Kumgang resort and the industrial complex to be the policy's biggest 
successes, but the resort project has been suspended for eight 
months due to the killing of a South Korean tourist by a North 
Korean soldier last summer.  The complex is now being held hostage 
 
SEOUL 00000399  004 OF 007 
 
 
under Pyongyang's political whims. 
 
As if they were spokesmen for North Korea, the main opposition 
Democratic Party and pro-North Korea groups are blaming South Korean 
President Lee Myung-bak for everything since he failed to carry on 
the sunshine policy.  In the face of a missile threat from 
Pyongyang, it is outrageous for them to dump all the blame onto the 
South Korean government, whose only mistake was to strive for 
inter-Korean economic cooperation and exchanges.  Such division is 
exactly what Pyongyang wants.  The North is waiting for Seoul to 
surrender and apologize by driving a wedge within the South Korean 
public. 
 
The Kaesong complex cannot continue to run without assurances for 
the safety of South Korean workers.  Seoul needs to come up with 
fundamental solutions this time.  With no prospects of political and 
military dtente between the two Koreas, bilateral economic 
cooperation projects could derail at any time.  Unless Pyongyang 
immediately reopens the border and provides a strong security 
guarantee, Seoul should make it clear that it can give up the 
Kaesong complex altogether.  The international community should deal 
with the civilian-threatening North with a clear understanding of 
its true intentions. 
 
* This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version. 
 
 
Missile Madness 
(JoongAng Ilbo, March 14, 2009, Page 30) 
 
On Thursday, North Korea notified the International Maritime 
Organization and the International Civil Aviation Organization of 
its plan to launch an experimental satellite, Kwangmyongsong-2.  The 
intention is to demonstrate in an indirect way that North Korea 
possesses high-level missile technology advanced enough to send an 
intercontinental ballistic missile to the United States.  The entire 
international society, including the United States, Japan, China, 
Russia and the United Nations as well as South Korea, expressed 
concern and opposition, but North Korea doesn't care at all about 
their response.  Worries grow that weeks-long diplomatic efforts to 
dissuade North Korea from conducting the launch will eventually 
fail. 
 
The North's missile experiment will shake the balance of security 
over all of Northeast Asia.  First of all, it will stir Japan's 
anxiety over safety.  In 1998 Japan seethed at North Korea's launch 
of a rocket that flew over the Japanese islands. 
 
Because of the launch, right-wing forces in Japan easily called for 
enhancement of military capacity and such capacity was, indeed, 
boosted.  The same will happen this time too if the North goes ahead 
with its plan.  That's why some say right-wingers in Japan would 
welcome North Korea's missile test- 
 
After North Korea's 1998 missile launch, Japan actively participated 
in the U.S.-led missile defense system.  So far, Japan has focused 
on enhancing its defense capacity but that could change.  Japan has 
already amended its pacifist constitution and now the "normal state 
theory" (which means the country must have a strong military 
capacity to match its economic power as the world's second-largest 
economy) is widely accepted.  The normal state theory, despite its 
name, means that Japan wants to be a military superpower with the 
capacity to attack.  North Korea's missile launch will provide 
decisive support to Japanese right-wing forces who want their 
country to become a military powerhouse. 
 
Japan's enhancement of its military capacity will inevitably 
stimulate China and Russia as well as us. North Korea's missile will 
come back at it like a boomerang.  An armament race will certainly 
put a burden on strong countries, but it will be a calamity to us 
and to North Korea, because we have no chance of winning the 
armament race against strong countries.  North Korea's missile 
blocks an opportunity for Northeast Asian countries to prosper 
 
SEOUL 00000399  005 OF 007 
 
 
together in peace. 
 
North Korea must stop toying with its missile because it will only 
harm itself. 
 
* This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version. 
 
 
Seoul Must Deal More Firmly with N. Korea 
(Chosun Ilbo, March 16, 2009, Page 35) 
 
North Korea has effectively detained about 720 South Koreans working 
at the joint Kaesong Industrial Complex since Friday.  On Thursday, 
Pyongyang notified international agencies that it would launch a 
satellite, which is widely believed in the West to be a long-range 
ballistic missile.  The North has been continuing to threaten land, 
sea and air skirmishes since last fall. 
 
Late last year it cut off official inter-Korean communication 
channels and suspended Kaesong tourist tour and railroad 
transportation between Seoul and Kaesong.  This year it raised 
objections to the Northern Limit Line, the de facto marine border 
off the west coast, declared inter-Korean political and military 
agreements null and void, threatened clashes along the DMZ, and 
warned it could not guarantee the safety of passenger jets flying 
through its airspace. 
 
Against all this, our government has presented no clear-cut response 
other than to wait and see.  North Korea's effective detention of 
more than 720 South Koreans is a serious provocation threatening the 
safety of our countrymen.  All the government has done is to protest 
and ask the North to please reopen the border.  Of course the 
government has to be careful because the approximately720 South 
Koreans are effectively being held hostage in Kaesong and the 
government has limited room to maneuver because of the symbolic 
significance of the joint industrial park. 
 
But the development this time around has been anticipated to an 
extent.  North Korea blocked the border on Monday and reopened it 
the next day.  The North expelled all South Korean government 
officials from the Kaesong industrial park late last year.  The fate 
of South Koreans was virtually left in the hands of the North, 
without any proper response. 
 
The government should have prepared for an emergency.  If it had 
made it clear when the North first closed and then reopened the 
border last week that business at the Kaesong industrial park cannot 
carry on unless Pyongyang pledges to keep the border open, we would 
not be in the same situation again. 
 
As for the North's preparations for a missile launch, the government 
is also merely waiting to see what Pyongyang does.  After the North 
notified international agencies of its so-called satellite launch, 
the government here seems to have decided there is now nothing it 
can do. 
 
Since the signs of the imminent missile test were detected in early 
February, the government attempted to prevent it through cooperation 
with the U.S.  That Pyongyang apparently ignores such diplomatic 
pressure either means it has no respect for the ROKG or that the 
ROKG lacks the requisite resolve. 
 
Recently Washington is said to have been reluctant to share 
intelligence on North Korea with Seoul, out of a suspicion that 
Seoul keeps leaking it.  Cooperation over North Korea can hardly 
move forward in such a situation.  The government must reassure the 
public that it is fully prepared to deal with North Korean 
provocations, instead of being left helpless to deal with them. 
 
* This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version. 
 
 
 
SEOUL 00000399  006 OF 007 
 
 
Casting Doubt on Kaesong's Future 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, March 16, 2009, Page 23) 
 
It is inexcusable that North Korea has again, beginning Friday, 
prohibited Southerners from traveling to and from the Kaesong 
Industrial Complex.  If arbitrary decisions like this continue it 
will cast doubt on the complex's future.  ROK companies that have 
invested there are already being hurt by this. 
 
This move on the part of the North directly violates the "Agreement 
on the Entrance to and Sojourn at the Kaesong Industrial Complex and 
Mount Kumgang Tourism Zone" that exists between North and South 
Korea.  It also violates the North's own Kaesong Industrial Zone 
Law.  It also hurts the spirit of inter-Korean economic cooperation 
and damages South Korean public opinion.  When the North blocked 
free passage to and from Kaesong on March 9, it said it was doing so 
because of the "Key Resolve" joint U.S.-South Korea military 
exercises.  Not liking the war games does not justify attacking the 
Kaesong Industrial Complex project.  What other country is going to 
trust North Korea enough to invest there if this model of 
inter-Korean economic cooperation fails? 
 
What North Korea needs to do is clear.  For starters, it has to make 
sure people from the ROK and their goods can freely travel between 
Kaesong and the South.  Then it needs to convince the South and the 
whole world that nothing like this is ever going to happen again. 
Even if it allows travel to resume, companies in the complex are 
going to remain ill at ease.  Pyongyang has a basic responsibility 
to create conditions in which ROK citizens can relax and go about 
their work. 
 
The Lee Myung-bak Administration needs to take effective action to 
quickly bring the situation to an end.  It should not be too lax due 
to unrealistic optimism and it should not make matters worse by 
overreacting.  It also needs to completely reevaluate its North 
Korea policy.  The reason why things have come to this is due to the 
continuing deterioration of relations (between North and South) 
since the start of the Lee Administration, and because there are 
limits to what the administration can do by just "managing" the 
developments as they happen.  The Key Resolve exercises will end on 
March 20, but if there continues to be a lack of trust between the 
two sides you will never know when something like this can happen 
again.  The Lee Administration needs to give some serious thought as 
to why the North is reacting so sensitively to this year's joint 
South Korea-U.S. military exercises. 
 
The Kaesong Industrial Complex enterprise has already suffered a lot 
of damage.  It is of no help to either the North or South to have it 
be the focus of so much negative news coverage.  The North and South 
urgently need to make the right decision and engage each other in 
dialogue. 
 
* This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version. 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
Crisis Hurting Korean Professionals Seeking Jobs in U.S.   (Dong-a 
Ilbo, March 14, 2009, Page 11) 
 
By Washington Correspondents Ha Tae-won and Lee Ki-hong 
 
A 39-year-old Korean worker at an information technology company in 
Boston with an H-1B visa for professionals turned on his computer at 
work.  In an e-mail message from the company's personnel department, 
he was told he would be laid off. 
 
He was told to leave his office by 5 p.m. the day he received the 
notification. 
 
"While I was packing up, the personnel officer watched me nearby," 
he said.  "I felt so bad because the officer apparently wanted to 
 
SEOUL 00000399  007 OF 007 
 
 
ensure that I didn't take any c-o-n-f-i-d-e-n-t-i-a-l documents from 
my computer," the worker said. 
 
For another Korean who graduated from a prestigious U.S. business 
school and dreamed of working on Wall Street, the past several 
months have been a nightmare. 
 
While working at a New York hedge fund with an optional practical 
training visa after graduation, his employer promised him an H-1B 
visa.  His boss reneged on the pledge amid the economic crisis, so 
the 28-year-old Korean had to go home since his training visa was 
valid for just one year. 
 
Amid the economic crisis, Korean professionals with degrees earned 
in the United States are losing their jobs. 
 
American companies provide H-1B visas for nearly 120,000 employees. 
The road to acquire the visa is long and rough, however, as more 
than one million people want it every year.  Moreover, the 
implementation of the Troubled Asset Relief Program has led to fewer 
job opportunities for non-citizens since the inauguration of 
President Barack Obama. 
 
The program requires a company receiving government funds to prove 
that it tried to employ U.S. citizens before hiring foreigners, and 
that the foreigners to be employed are the most qualified for the 
positions offered. 
 
In letters to foreign students, job placement centers at business 
schools, including Harvard and (University of) Pennsylvania, 
conveyed the information.  They tell students that job offers by 
U.S. companies could be withdrawn due to the economic crisis. 
 
A Korean set to earn a graduate degree from a New York school in the 
spring is desperate for a job.  General Electric, American Express 
and many other U.S. companies that previously were relatively 
generous to overseas students with jobs, have allowed only Americans 
and permanent residents to apply for internships this year. 
 
Certain students are going back to school.  A Korean who received an 
MBA from George Washington University will seek a degree in 
information technology at the school because of difficulty in 
finding a visa sponsor. 
 
Others go so far as to defer their theses to maintain their foreign 
student status, though that means they must keep paying high 
tuition.  A Korean in Virginia who is on the verge of finishing his 
dissertation said he plans to stay a student for another semester. 
 
The delayed ratification of the Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement is 
also preventing many Koreans from getting jobs in the United States. 
 The accord allows for a job visa quota for Koreans separate from 
the annual limit on the number of the H-1B visas issued. 
 
Experts in the United States have warned of the increasing exodus of 
foreign professionals to their home countries and the consequences 
of their departures for America. 
 
The Washington Post said, "When smart young foreigners leave these 
shores, they take with them the seeds of tomorrow's innovation. 
 
* This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version. 
 
 
STEPHENS
</file>