^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1965 | 2009-12-18 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 17일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001965

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 17일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/09/27 10:08//

===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
태국 억류 北 수송기 ＂대포동 2호 부품 나왔다＂

중앙일보, 한국일보, 모든 텔레비전
한 전 총리, 영장 발부 소식 듣고 "알았다"

동아일보, 서울신문
경주서 관광버스 추락…한마을 노인 17명 참변

한겨레 신문
청와대, 3자회동 사실상 거부

세계일보
경제부처 업무보고…전기료 2011년 국제원가 연동 부과

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

워싱턴의 외교 소식통과 외신에 의하면 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 이번주 평양 방문 중에 오바마 대통령의 친서가 김정일 위원장에게 전달되었다. (전체)

<wrap hi>로이터 통신은 16일 태국 당국이 방콕에 기착했던 북한발 화물기를 압류해 조사한 결과, 북한의 장거리 미사일인 대포동 2호의 부품들이 조립되지 않은 상태로 발견됐다고 보도했다.</wrap> (조선, 동아, 한국)<WRAP center round info 100%>//**조선일보가 오보에 용감한 까닭은?**//…네번째로 소개한 글 역시 <조선일보>가 2009년 12월 17일자 1면 톱으로 큼지막하게 보도한「태국 억류 北 수송기 "대포동 2호 부품 나왔다"」기사의 일부분이다. 그러나 <조선일보> 보도 직후 태국 정부 대변인은 "태국에 억류된 북한발 무기 수송기에서 대포동 2호 미사일 부품은 발견되지 않았다"고 밝혔다. <조선일보>가 이에 대해 정정보도를 했는지는 아직 확인된 바 없다. [[http://www.mediaus.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=12798|조선일보가 오보에 용감한 까닭은?]] //미디어스//
</WRAP>

태국 보안 당국의 한 고위 관계자는 "정부 내 군사 전문가들은 북한이 이란과 협력해 대포동 2호를 생산한 점을 감안할 때 억류된 화물기가 이란으로 향하고 있었을 것으로 본다"고 말했다. (조선, 동아, 한국)

서울의 대북 소식통은 16일 북한이 지난달 30일 단행한 화폐 개혁은 지난 9월 김정일 국방위원장의 경제관리 노선 변경 지시에 따른 것이라고 전했다. 이 소식통은 “김 위원장이 9월 초 내각의 무역성과 대외사업기관을 비롯한 경제부처 주요 간부들을 대상으로 ‘계획경제와 시장경제의 조화는 불가하다’는 방침을 내렸다”고 말했다. (중앙)

정통한 대북 정보소식통들은 16일 “올해 북한의 무기 수출 규모는 2억 달러에 육박해 지난해와 비교하면 배 이상 늘었다”고 말했다. (동아일보)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

한국의 모든 언론은 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 이번주 평양 방문 중에 오바마 대통령의 친서가 김정일 위원장에게 전달되었다는 16일 외신 보도를 다뤘다.

보수 조선일보는 미국 정부가 친서의 존재에 대해 공개하기를 꺼린 점을 거론하며 비핵화가 순조롭게 진행될 경우 미·북 정상회담의 가능성 등 파격적인 내용이 들어갔을 가능성도 언급하였다.

보수 세계일보는 유명환 외교통상부 장관이 16일 “북한은 지난 8∼10일 북한을 방문한 보즈워스 대표에게 유엔이 대북 제재를 가하는 것은 부당하다는 입장을 밝힌 것으로 알고 있다”고 밝혔다고 전했다. 유 장관은 이어 “이것은 새로운 주장이 아니다”며 “북한이 6자회담에 나오기에 앞서 미국의 대북 적대시정책이 해제돼야 한다고 주장해온 것과 마찬가지”라고 지적했다고 세계일보는 덧붙였다.

대다수 언론은 태국 당국이 방콕에 기착했던 북한발 화물기를 압류해 조사한 결과, 북한의 장거리 미사일인 대포동 2호의 부품들이 조립되지 않은 상태로 발견됐다는 로이터 통신의 16일 보도를 되풀이했다. "정부 내 군사 전문가들은 북한이 이란과 협력해 대포동 2호를 생산한 점을 감안할 때 억류된 화물기가 이란으로 향하고 있었을 것으로 본다"는 태국 보안 당국의 한 고위 관계자의 발언도 널리 인용되었다.

보수 조선일보는 관련 소식으로 북한이 이란의 순항미사일 개발을 지원하고 있다고 산케이신문이 8일 워싱턴발 보도에 관심을 보였다. 일간지 산케이 보도로는 두 나라가 개발하는 미사일은 핵탄두 탑재가 가능해 생산에 성공할 경우 중동지역은 물론 북한의 미사일 기술 향상과 연결될 수 있다고 한다.

===== 특집 =====

**김정일 “계획경제와 시장경제 같이 못 가”**(중앙일보, 2009년 12월 17일)

정용수 기자

북한이 지난달 30일 단행한 화폐 개혁은 지난 9월 김정일 국방위원장의 경제관리 노선 변경 지시에 따른 것으로 밝혀졌다.

서울의 대북 소식통은 16일 “김 위원장이 9월 초 내각의 무역성과 대외사업기관을 비롯한 경제부처 주요 간부들을 대상으로 ‘계획경제와 시장경제의 조화는 불가하다’는 방침을 내렸다”며

“화폐 개혁은 이에 따라 내부 통제와 계획경제를 강화하기 위해 실시한 것”이라고 말했다.

지난 9월 경제노선 변경 천명 … 최근 단행된 화폐개혁 신호탄 돼

이 소식통은 북한 내각 경제부처 고위 관계자의 말을 인용해 이같이 전하고 “김 위원장의 지시를 담은 새 경제관리 노선은 내년 1월 1일 3개 신문 신년 공동사설(신년사)에 반영될 것으로 안다”고 설명했다.

이는 이번 화폐 개혁의 주목적이 2002년 이후 두드러지기 시작한 소규모 시장(장마당) 등의 시장경제 요소를 약화시키고, 국가 계획경제를 강화하려는 것임을 나타내준다.

북한은 2002년 7·1 경제관리 개선조치를 통해 장마당 등의 시세에 맞춰 국정 가격과 임금을 인상하고 인센티브제와 기업의 자율성 확대 등 시장경제 요소를 도입했으나 인플레이션과 빈부 격차의 부작용을 겪어왔다.

대북 소식통은 또 “김 위원장은 경제부처 간부들에게 경제관리 노선변경 외에 미국을 비롯한 서방 자본의 유치도 지시했다”고 전했다.

소식통은 “북한은 93년과 2002년 나진·선봉과 신의주 특구를 통해 해외 자본 유치를 시도했으나 성과가 없었다”며 “이번에는 특구 확대와 특구 이외 지역에 대한 투자 유치도 적극 시도할 것”이라고 덧붙였다.

인제대 진희관(통일학) 교수는 “북한의 경제노선 변경은 7·1조치가 실패했다고 인정한 것”이라며

“최근 경제가 회복 조짐을 보이고 중국의 경제 지원으로 물자 공급에 자신이 있다는 판단도 작용했을 것”이라고 분석했다.

국영 연구기관소의 한 대북 전문가는 김정일이 6월 발언에서 이미 경제 노선 변화가 임박했음을 시사했다고 밝혔다. 당시 김정일은 "자립 경제" 달성에 매진해야 한다고 말했다((영문기사에만 나오는 문장)).

이 전문가는 "자립을 강조하는 것은 본질적으로 7·1조치를 폐기하겠다는 의미"라며 "7·1조치의 부작용"을 대해 무슨 수를 써야 할지 골치를 썩고 있는 김정일의 모습이 눈에 선하다"고 말했다((영문기사에만 나오는 문장)).

**[뉴스분석] 보즈워스 다녀간 뒤 북 긍정적 태도 변화 오바마 친서 효과?**(중앙일보, 12월 17일, 10면)

최상연·김동호 특파원 

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 국무부 대북정책 특별대표의 방북 결과는 예상보다 훨씬 긍정적이었다. 우선 북한 반응이 그랬다. 북한 외무성 대변인은 보즈워스 대표가 방북 일정을 마친 다음 날(11일) “6자회담 재개 필요성과 9·19 공동성명 이행의 중요성과 관련해 일련의 공동 인식이 이룩됐다”고 밝혔다. 이런 북한을 놓고 미국은 “좋은 출발”이라고 평가했다.

북한이 6자회담 복귀를 약속한 것은 아니었다. 하지만 북한이 지난 4월 “6자회담에 다시는 절대로 참가하지 않을 것”이라고 선언한 뒤 6자회담 재개와 9·19 공동성명 이행을 언급한 것 자체가 처음 나왔다. 커다란 태도 변화다.

워싱턴의 북한 전문가들은 이런 변화가 다소 의외라며 고개를 갸우뚱거렸다. 무엇보다 북한과 미국은 후속 대화 개최 일정을 논의하지 않았다. 게다가 보즈워스 대표는 김정일 북한 국방위원장을 만나지 못한 채 방북 일정을 예정대로 마쳤다. 그런 만큼 북한의 변화엔 “뭔가 있을 것”이란 얘기가 워싱턴 외교가에 번져가고 있었다. 그런데 변화를 이끈 동력이 보즈워스 대표를 통해 김정일 국방위원장에게 전달된 버락 오바마 미 대통령의 친서였다는 게 드러난 것이다.

대통령 친서는 외교적 구속력을 갖지는 않는다. 그러나 일반적으로 한 나라의 수반이 취할 수 있는 가장 정중한 형태의 요청을 담는 문서다. 물론 비공개로 수면 아래 잠기는 경우가 많다. 이번에도 오바마 정부는 6자회담 다른 참가국에 이런 사실을 공개하면 안 된다고 강조한 것으로 알려졌다. 우리 정부는 “보즈워스 대표가 친서에 대해 얘기하지 않았고, 아는 바 없다”거나 “언급하기에 적절치 않다”는 입장을 유지하고 있다.

문제는 친서의 내용이다. 오바마 정부는 그동안 북한이 6자회담에 복귀하는 것을 설득하기 위해 대북 제재를 철회하거나 다른 인센티브를 제공하지 않을 것이라는 점을 거듭 밝혔다. 필립 크롤리 미 국무부 공보담당 차관보는 “북한이 6자회담으로 되돌아오고, 단정적인 비핵화 조치를 취한다면 북한을 위해 많은 가능성이 열려 있다는 점을 보즈워스 대표가 북측에 전달했다”고 설명했다. 이와 관련해 일본 요미우리(讀賣)신문은 16일 미 정부 관계자의 말을 인용, “보즈워스 대표가 방북했을 때 북한이 복귀할 명분을 만들어 달라고 요구했다”고 보도했다. 그러면서 “이 관계자가 경제제재 해제가 그 명분일 것으로 추정했다”고 덧붙였다.

김정일에게는 빌 클린턴, 조지 W 부시 전 대통령도 친서를 보냈다. 하지만 집중적 외교 노력을 펼친 이후 이뤄졌다는 점에서 오바마 대통령의 이번 친서는 이례적이다. 부시 전 대통령은 임기 말인 2007년 말 “북한이 핵프로그램을 완전하고 정확히 신고하면 관계정상화가 가능하다”는 서한을 보냈다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1965.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001965 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 17, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Plane Impounded in Thailand Contains 
Taepodong-2 Missile Parts 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo, All TVs 
Court Issues Warrant to Arrest Former Prime Minister 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
17 Killed in Tourist Bus Crash near Gyeongju 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Blue House Effectively Rejects "Three-Way Meeting" between Leaders 
of Ruling and Opposition Parties and President Lee 
to Resolve Budget Impasse 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Gas Rates to be Linked to Global Oil Prices 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to a diplomatic source in Washington and foreign media, 
President Barack Obama sent a personal letter to North Korean leader 
Kim Jong-il that was delivered last week when Special Representative 
for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth visited Pyongyang. (All) 
 
According to Reuters, Thai investigators searching cargo seized from 
a plane from North Korea that landed in Bangkok have found weaponry 
that includes unassembled Taepodong-2 missile parts. (Chosun, 
Dong-a, Hankook) 
 
A high-ranking Thai government security official said: "Given that 
North Korea has developed the Taepodong-2 missile in cooperation 
with Iran, some experts believe that the seized weapons (were 
destined for) Iran." (Chosun, Dong-a, Hankook) 
 
According to a source in Seoul, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il 
ordered the November currency revaluation in his country to get a 
better handle on the North's economy. The source said that the North 
Korean leader issued a directive in early September saying that the 
North's planned economy and the market economy, which developed 
after an earlier economic reform, could not coexist. (JoongAng) 
 
According to a source well-versed in North Korean affairs, North 
Korea's arms exports this year have reached nearly $200 million, 
twice the amount of last year's. (Dong-a) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
All ROK media covered yesterday's foreign media reports that 
President Barack Obama sent a personal letter to North Korean leader 
Kim Jong-il, which was delivered last week when Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth visited 
Pyongyang. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo noted Washington's unwillingness to make 
public the existence of the letter, and said that there is 
speculation that President Obama may have made "bold" promises (to 
North Korea), such as a bilateral summit, if the North's 
denuclearization proceeds smoothly. 
 
Conservative Segye Ilbo quoted Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan as 
telling reporters yesterday: "(I am) aware that North Korea conveyed 
 
SEOUL 00001965  002 OF 004 
 
 
to Ambassador Bosworth, who traveled to the North from Dec. 8 to 10, 
that the U.N. sanctions on the country are unreasonable.  This is 
nothing new.  (The claim) is similar to the North's insistence that 
the U.S. drop its hostile policy toward the North before it returns 
to the Six-Party Talks." 
 
Most media replayed a Dec. 16 report by Reuters that Thai 
investigators searching cargo seized from a plane from North Korea 
that landed in Bangkok have found weaponry that includes unassembled 
Taepodong-2 missile parts.  A high-ranking Thai government security 
official was widely quoted as saying: "Given that North Korea has 
developed the Taepodong-2 missile in cooperation with Iran, some 
experts believe that the seized weapons (were destined for) Iran." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo, in a related development, gave attention 
to a Dec. 8 report by Japan's Sankei Shimbun claiming that North 
Korea is assisting Iran in developing a cruise missile.  According 
to the Japanese daily, an unnamed diplomatic source claimed that the 
missile under development is capable of carrying a nuclear warhead 
and could lead to technical improvements in Middle Eastern and North 
Korean missile technologies. 
 
 
FEATURES 
---------- 
 
NORTH'S KIM MOVED TO END MARKET ECONOMY 
(JoongAng Daily, December 17, 2009) 
 
By Reporter Jeong Yong-soo 
 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il had ordered the November currency 
revaluation in his country in September to get a better handle on 
the economy, the JoongAng Ilbo has learned. 
 
A source in Seoul said yesterday that Kim issued a directive in 
early September to officials handling the economy saying that North 
Korea's planned economy and the market economy, which developed 
after an earlier economic reform, could not coexist. 
 
"The currency reform was designed to restore order within, and 
strengthen, the centrally planned economy," the source said, 
referring to the economic system managed directly by the state. 
 
The central government makes all economy-related decisions. 
 
Relaying a message from a high-ranking economic official in 
Pyongyang, the source added, "The new economic policy line, 
reflecting Kim Jong-il's wishes, is expected to be included in his 
New Year's Day editorial in newspapers on Jan. 1." 
 
Soon after the revaluation began on Nov. 30, exchanging old bills 
for new ones at the rate of 100 to 1, various sources said the move 
was aimed at curbing inflation following the economic reform 
measures from July 1, 2002. 
 
The North in 2002 introduced some market economy aspects, raising 
wages, expanding corporate incentives and gave companies leeway to 
set their own business plans.  The side effects have been inflation 
and a widening gap between the rich and the poor. 
 
The Seoul source also said Kim Jong-il asked the economic officials 
to attract more investments from the Western world, including the 
United States. 
 
"North Korea tried to draw investment through special financial 
districts in 1993 and 2002, but had little success," the source 
said.  "This time, the North (plans to) expand those special 
districts and will try to bring in foreign capital to other areas, 
too." 
 
Professor Chin Hee-gwan of Inje University's unification studies 
program said the North has in effect acknowledged the failure of the 
July 1 measures. 
 
SEOUL 00001965  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
"The expanded market economy had a spillover effect on the planned 
economy, and internally, the North has admitted its mishap," Chin 
said.  "The North's economy now appears to be on the upswing, and it 
must be confident about supplying goods through its ties with 
China." 
 
A North Korean expert at a state-run research institute said Kim 
Jong-il had already hinted in his June statement that economic 
change was imminent.  Kim at the time said the North Korean people 
should strive to achieve "self-reliant economic revival." 
 
"Stressing self-reliance essentially meant doing away with the July 
1 measures," the expert said.  "I can just picture Kim agonizing 
over what to do with the side effects from July 1." 
 
 
IS NORTH KOREA TAKING A POSITIVE ATTITUDE AFTER BOSWORTH'S VISIT DUE 
TO OBAMA'S PERSONAL LETTER? 
(JoonAng Ilbo, December 17, Page 10) 
 
By Correspondents Choi Sang-yeon and Kim Dong-ho 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth's visit to North Korea produced much more positive results 
than expected.  On December 11, one day after Ambassador Bosworth 
wrapped up his visit, a North Korean Foreign Ministry spokesman said 
that the two sides reached a series of common understandings on the 
need to resume the Six-Party Talks and the importance of 
implementing the September 19 Joint Statement.  The U.S. said that 
this statement signals a good start. 
 
Even though North Korea stopped short of pledging to return to the 
Six-Party Talks, it is the first time the North mentioned the 
resumption of the Six-Party Talks and the implementation of the 
September 19 Joint Statement since it vowed never to return to the 
multilateral forum in April.  Therefore, this represents a 
significant change in North Korea's attitude. 
 
U.S. experts on North Korea viewed this change (in the North Korean 
attitude) as somewhat unexpected.  North Korea and the U.S. had no 
discussions on follow-up talks.  Moreover, Ambassador Bosworth's 
visit did not include a meeting with North Korean leader Kim 
Jong-il.  Therefore, diplomatic sources in Washington speculated 
that "something" is behind the change in North Korea's attitude.  It 
turns out that the change was apparently driven by President Obama's 
personal letter which Ambassador Bosworth delivered to Kim Jong-il. 
 
A presidential letter is not diplomatically binding but generally 
contains polite requests from a state leader.  A presidential letter 
is often kept under wraps and remains undisclosed.  This time again, 
the Obama Administration reportedly stressed to the other Six-Party 
nations that the fact should not be disclosed.  The ROKG is 
maintaining the position that "Ambassador Bosworth did not talk 
about the personal letter, and we do not know about it" or that "It 
is not appropriate to mention it." 
 
The problem is the contents of the letter.  Up until now, the Obama 
Administration has reiterated that it will not withdraw sanctions 
against North Korea or provide other incentives in order to persuade 
the North to rejoin the Six-Party Talks.  Assistant Secretary of 
State for Public Affairs Philip Crowley noted, "Ambassador Bosworth 
and the team made clear to North Korea, should they come back to the 
Six-Party process, should they take affirmative steps in the 
denuclearization process, then a range of other possibilities open 
up for North Korea."  In this regard, Japan's Yomiuri Shimbun quoted 
a USG official as saying on December 16, "When Ambassador Bosworth 
visited Pyongyang, the North asked him to provide it with a 
justification for returning to the Six-Party Talks."  The daily 
added, "The official presumed that the lifting of the economic 
sanctions is the justification." 
 
Former U.S. Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush also sent 
their personal letters to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il.  However, 
 
SEOUL 00001965  004 OF 004 
 
 
President Obama's letter is unusual in the sense that the missive 
was sent after intensive diplomatic efforts.  Former President Bush 
wrote in his letter sent in late 2007, late in his term, "We can 
have normalized relations on the condition that North Korea fully 
discloses its nuclear plans." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>
