^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1501  |  2009-09-21  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론보도; 2009년 9월 21일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 08 SEOUL 001501

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=82991|서울, 언론보도; 2009년 9월 21일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/01/22 11:19//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 세계일보, 서울신문
대졸 정규직 취업 최악

중앙일보
수능 1~2등급 받은 비율/ 광주, 부산 연제구가 1위

동아일보
'세종시 청문회'/ 정국 뇌관으로

한국일보
세종시 이전 부처 규모/ 원안 vs 수정안 '반뼘차'

한겨레 신문
"명백한 위법 눈감고 임명할텐가"
===== 국제 뉴스 =====

오바마 대통령은 9월 20일 CNN에 출연해 북한 김정일 위원장이 "매우 건강하며 북한을 통제하고 있다"고 말했다. 오바마의 이 발언은 미국이 북한과의 양자 회담 재개를 고려하고 있는 시기에 나왔다. (중앙, 한겨레, 한국, 세계, 서울)

일본 방문을 마치고 이날 워싱턴에 도착한 캠벨 차관보는 “미국은 한국·일본·중국과 긴밀한 협력 하에 북한이 진정 6자회담 틀로 복귀하고, 우리가 모두 이루고자 하는 검증 가능한 한반도 비핵화를 행해 다시 나아갈 자세가 돼 있는지 지켜볼 준비가 돼 있다”고 9월 19일 기자들에게 말했다. 이번 발언은 양자 또는 다자 회담을 통해 북핵 문제를 해결할 용의가 있다는 김정일의 최근 발언에 대한 반응이다. (조선)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

9월 19일 모든 언론은 김정일이 북한은 양자 대화와 다자 대화를 통해 핵 문제를 해결할 용의가 있다고 방북 중인 중국 다이빙궈 국무위원에게 말했다고 전하는 신화 뉴스 보도를 1면에 보도하였다.

대다수 언론은 동 보도에 대해 청와대 관계자는 "북한이 6자회담에 복귀하겠다고 특정해서 말하지 않았다며 우리는 중국 대표단이 복귀한 이후 북한의 진짜 의중에 대해 알아볼 예정이다"고 말했다며 한국 정부의 신중한 반응을 언급했다.

보수 조선일보는 이런 사건 전개 양상은 지금의 전례 없는 한미중의 북한 압박 공조가 먹히고 있다는 증거라고 설명하였다. 중도 우파 중앙일보는 <[[http://nk.joins.com/news/view.asp?aid=3480427|“6자 복귀 의사부터 …” 미국 요구 먹혔다]]; 큰 ‘장애물’ 일단 제거, 보즈워스 방북 당겨질 듯>이라는 제하의 기사를 작성했다. 보수 동아일보 기자의 제목 <도발→제재→중재→대화 ‘북핵 쳇바퀴’ 다시 도나>

오늘 조선일보는 <김정일 발언(＂양자·다자협상하겠다＂)에도 美 ＂6자회담 고수＂>란 제하의 내부 지면 보도를 실었다. 보도는 미 국무부의 커트 캠벨(Campbell) 동아태 차관보는 19일 북한이 핵 프로그램 폐기를 위한 6자회담에 복귀할 준비가 돼 있는지를 지켜볼 것이라고 말했다고 인용했다. 기사는 워싱턴 DC의 한 외교소식통은 "북한이 6자회담을 사멸시키려는 중요한 이유는 2005년 6자회담에서 한반도 비핵화를 합의한 9·19 공동성명을 무력화하려는 것"이라며 "오바마 행정부는 이를 잘 알고 있기에 회담의 틀을 바꾸는 데 무척 신중하다"고 말했다고 역시 전했다.

보수 동아일보 토요일자 사설: "북한은 4월 “6자회담에 절대로 참여하지 않겠다”고 선언했다. 다자회담을 하자면서 3자회담이나 4자회담을 요구해 6자회담 참가국의 분열을 노릴 수도 있다. 북한의 과거 행태로 미루어 보면 대화 재개를 이유로 반대급부를 요구할 가능성도 있다."

중도 한국일보 오늘자 사설: "북한이 어떤 의도와 조건을 내걸고 있는지 확인한 이후에 판단하겠다는 입장도 틀리지 않는다. 그러나 북핵 국면의 대전환 가능성에 대해 지나치게 소극적ㆍ수동적으로 임하는 게 아닌가 하는 생각을 떨칠 수가 없다. …유엔총회와 피츠버그 G20금융정상회의 참석을 위해 어제 출국한 이명박 대통령의 방미 일정은 북핵 문제의 새 국면에 대한 우리의 자세를 보다 주도적, 적극적 방향으로 가다듬고 재정립하는 기회가 되어야 한다."

==== 피츠버그 G20 정상 회담 ====

중도 우파 중앙일보 오늘자 사설: "한국은 이미 G20 재무장관 및 중앙은행 총재 회의의 일원이다. 더구나 내년엔 이 회의의 의장국이다. 세계에서 가장 먼저 금융위기에서 벗어나고 있는 한국은 선진국과 개도국 사이에서 ‘정직한 브로커’의 건설적 역할을 할 수 있는 유리한 입지에 있다. 어느 모로 보나 내년 G20 정상회의의 한국 개최는 자연스럽고 순리에 맞다."

==== 동부 유럽 미사일 방어 계획 백지화한 오바마의 결정 ====

좌파 성향 한겨레신문 9월 19일 사설: "오바마 정부의 이번 정책 전환은, 그들은 부인하지만, 대러 관계 개선을 목표로 한다. 현재 미국의 가장 중요한 대외정책 목표인 이란과 아프가니스탄 문제 해결을 위해선 러시아의 도움이 절실한 형편이다. 또 러시아와 만료 예정인 전략무기감축협정을 대체할 새로운 협정에 대한 논의도 시작해야 한다. 드미트리 메드베데프 대통령은 오바마의 결정을 책임 있는 움직임으로 평가하고 전향적으로 대응할 뜻을 비쳤다. 오바마의 정책 전환이 국제질서를 대립이 아닌 협력의 시대로 이끌 가능성을 보여준 셈이다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://news.donga.com/3/all/20090918/8811313/1|오바마는 속지 않을까]](동아일보, 2009년 9월 19일 30면: 발췌)**

방형남 논설위원

…실패한 북핵 외교의 교훈을 뼈저리게 새겨도 부족할 상황인데 버락 오바마 미국 행정부는 강경하던 생각을 바꿔 북이 요구하는 양자대화를 하기로 했다. 북에 제시할 인센티브(유인책) 목록까지 거론된다. 중국도 6자회담 수석대표인 우다웨이가 북에 6자회담 복귀를 설득하다 실패하자 다이빙궈 외교담당 국무위원을 평양으로 보내 김정일 국방위원장을 만나게 했다. 미국과 중국이 마치 그동안 잘못을 저질러온 것처럼 북한에 끌려가는 이상한 상황이 벌어지고 있다.

미국은 핵문제를 놓고 이미 2번이나 북한에 농락당했다. 빌 클린턴 전 대통령은 북-미 양자협상을 통해 1994년 제네바 합의를 이루었지만 북의 핵개발을 막지 못했다. 조지 W 부시 전 대통령은 9·19 공동성명에 넘어갔다. 오바마 대통령이 북과의 협상에 나서면 북핵 3수(修)가 되는 셈이다. 오바마는 전임자들과 달리 북의 속임수를 깰 수 있을까.

최근 미 정부의 행보를 보면 불안이 앞선다. 오바마 행정부는 ‘북의 6자회담 복귀 말고는 대안이 없다’고 하다가 ‘6자회담 틀 안의 북-미 양자회담’을 거쳐 ‘6자회담 촉진용 양자회담’으로 거듭 말을 바꾸었다. 이에 대해 미국에서도 비판론이 무성하다. 월스트리트저널은 ‘김정일이 또 한번의 승리를 거뒀다’는 제목의 사설에서 오바마 행정부가 외교를 살린다며 오히려 외교를 훼손했다고 비판했다.

오바마는 24일 유엔 안전보장이사회의 특별핵정상회의를 주재한다. 이어 내년 3월 핵보유국 정상회의와 5월 핵확산금지조약(NPT) 평가회의도 주도한다. 4월 자신이 주창한 ‘핵무기 없는 세계’를 실현하기 위한 발걸음들이다. 그러나 가장 시급한 현안인 북핵 문제를 해결 국면으로 이끌지 못하면 그의 핵외교는 공허해진다. 오바마는 북-미 양자회담이 성사되더라도 ‘잘못된 행동에 대한 보상은 없다’는 원칙은 반드시 지켜야 한다. 그래야 미국의 북핵 3수에 대한 희망도 생긴다.

**[[http://gangnam.joins.com/news/article/Article.aspx?total_id=3785412|[시론] 다자대화 제의에 담긴 김정일의 노림수(중앙일보, 2009년 9월 21일 45면)]]**

윤덕민 외교안보연구원 교수

김정일 북한 국방위원장이 최근 중국의 다이빙궈 국무위원에게 “양자대화와 다자대화를 통해 핵 문제를 해결하고 싶다”고 언급했다.

‘6자회담은 영원히 끝났다’면서 미국과의 양자대화만 고집하던 북한의 입장에 중대한 변화가 초래된 셈이다. 여기엔 국제사회의 제재, 특히 중국의 강경한 금수(禁輸)조치에 북한이 굴복했다는 지적도 있다. 하지만 놀랍게도 지난 20년간 적어도 세 차례 이상 반복되어온 북한의 전술 패턴에선 크게 벗어나지 않는다. 대외위기를 조성, 내부 체제정비에 활용한 후 대외 환경정비에 나서는 패턴이다.

금년도 북한의 행동 양상은 1990년대 초 1차 핵 위기 때와 거의 유사하다. …90년대 초와 한 가지 다른 점은 중국 변수다. 김정일은 클린턴 전 대통령을 만나 양자대화만 언급하고 6자회담 복귀는 이야기하지 않았다. 중국에 대한 카드로 남겨둔 것이었다. 이를 간파한 미국은 북한의 6자회담 복귀 문제를 6자회담 의장인 중국의 몫으로 남겨두었다. 북한은 핵·미사일 실험 이후 중국을 철저히 배제했다. 김정일이 클린턴과 현정은 현대그룹 회장을 만나고 이명박 대통령에게 특사까지 파견하는 가운데, 비슷한 시기 방북한 우다웨이 6자회담 대표는 중요 인사들을 만날 수 없었다. 한반도 주도권 상실을 우려한 후진타오 주석은 다이빙궈 국무위원을 특사로 파견한 것이다. ‘벼랑 끝 외교의 달인’ 김정일은 다자대화를 언급, 중국의 체면을 일부 세워준 것처럼 보이지만, 6자회담을 구체적으로 언급하지 않았다. 2007년 남북 정상회담의 10·4 공동선언에서 한반도 평화 문제를 ‘3자 혹은 4자’ 대화로 푼다고 밝혀, 3자가 누구인지와 관련해 중국을 긴장시켰던 것과 동일한 전술이다.

북한은 미국과의 양자대화를 통해 인도·파키스탄과 같이 미국과 국교를 맺으면서도 핵보유국의 지위를 얻으려 한다. 이를 위해 핵보유국 진입을 막으려는 국제공조를 깨려 한다. 미국에는 비핵화 가능성을, 한국에는 정상회담 가능성을 그리고 중국에는 6자회담 가능성을 각각 흘리고 있는 것이다. 아마 일본의 신정부에도 일본인 납치 문제와 관련해 유화 공세를 취하고 있을 것이다.

6자회담이 열린다고 핵 문제가 해결되는 것은 아니다. 북한은 6자회담 중에도 2차례나 핵실험을 했다. 북핵 문제를 해결하는 데 있어 가장 중요한 요인은 ‘핵을 포기하지 않으면 손해’라는 점을 한국·미국·중국·일본 그리고 러시아가 한목소리로 북한에 행동으로 보이는 것이다. 북한의 꼼수에 말려 누군가가 국제공조에서 이탈한다면, 우리는 북한의 세 번째 핵실험을 보게 될 것이며 북한의 핵 보유는 기정사실화될 것이다.

[사설]미국 엠디정책 전환은 합리주의의 승리(한겨레, 2009년 9월 19일 23면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령은 그제 폴란드와 체코에 미사일 방어(MD) 시스템을 설치하기로 한 조지 부시 전임 행정부의 계획을 백지화하고, 대신 새로운 방식의 유연한 미사일방어 체계를 구축할 계획이라고 밝혔다. 이는 미국의 대외정책이 합리적 판단에 기반하기 시작했음을 보여주는 징표로서 환영할 만하다.

부시 정부의 엠디정책은 그동안 엄청난 비용을 쏟아붓지만 실효성도 없고 쓸데없이 국제적 갈등만 야기하는 정책이란 비난을 받아왔다. 2002년 엠디 계획이 본격화한 뒤 900억달러 이상을 퍼부었음에도 10여 차례 시험에서 요격률이 50%를 밑도는 게 엠디 시스템의 현재 상황이다. 그런데도 부시 행정부가 이를 고집한 데는 딕 체니 전 부통령이나 도널드 럼스펠드 전 국방장관 같은 핵심 정책입안자들이 군산복합체와 유착관계에 있었던 탓이라는 분석도 제기돼 왔다.

부시 정부는 알래스카에 엠디 기지를 구축하는 것을 넘어 우리나라와 일본 등 동맹국에도 엠디 참여를 촉구했다. 그 때문에 엠디정책은 중국과 러시아를 자극했다. 특히 2006년 12월 현재 문제가 된 폴란드와 체코에 엠디 시스템을 도입하기로 한 결정은 미-러 관계 악화의 결정적 요인이 됐다. 이란과 북한의 장거리 미사일 공격에서 유럽을 보호한다는 명분이었지만, 러시아는 이를 자국을 겨냥한 것으로 보았기 때문이다.

그러므로 오바마 정부의 이번 정책 전환은, 그들은 부인하지만, 대러 관계 개선을 목표로 한다. 현재 미국의 가장 중요한 대외정책 목표인 이란과 아프가니스탄 문제 해결을 위해선 러시아의 도움이 절실한 형편이다. 또 러시아와 만료 예정인 전략무기감축협정을 대체할 새로운 협정에 대한 논의도 시작해야 한다. 드미트리 메드베데프 대통령은 오바마의 결정을 책임 있는 움직임으로 평가하고 전향적으로 대응할 뜻을 비쳤다. 오바마의 정책 전환이 국제질서를 대립이 아닌 협력의 시대로 이끌 가능성을 보여준 셈이다.

우리 역시 미국의 엠디정책 전환의 의미를 되새겨야 한다. 일본의 집권 민주당 안에서도 엠디 예산의 삭감을 요구하는 목소리가 높아지고 있다. 효율성이 적은 방어망 구축에 천문학적 돈을 들이기보다는 미사일이 날지 않아도 되는 국제환경을 만드는 것이 더 실용적이라는 판단이다. 우리도 긴장을 늦출 수 있는 방안에 정책의 우선순위를 둬야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

[사설]北의 다자회담 시사에 솔깃할 때 아니다(동아일보, 2009년 9월 19일, 31면 발췌)

김정일 북한 국방위원장이 어제 북한 핵문제 해결을 위한 대화에 다시 나오겠다는 의사를 표명했다. 김 위원장은 다이빙궈 중국 외교담당 국무위원에게 “비핵화 문제를 양자 또는 다자대화를 통해 해결하기를 희망한다”고 말했다. 김 위원장이 언급한 양자대화는 북-미 대화를 의미하는 것으로 보인다. 미국은 지난주 북-미 양자대화를 예고했다. 김 위원장이 회담복귀 의사를 표명함에 따라 북핵 문제를 풀기 위한 대화가 재개될 가능성이 열리기는 했다. 더구나 6자회담 의장국인 중국이 후진타오 국가주석의 특사 자격으로 다이빙궈를 평양에 보내 대화 재개를 설득한 결과여서 김 위원장의 말은 행동으로 옮겨질 것으로 예상된다. 그러나 김 위원장이 다자대화라는 참가대상국 수가 애매한 용어를 사용했기 때문에 6자회담이 곧 재개될 것처럼 성급하게 기대할 상황은 아니다. 북한이 끈질기게 요구하던 북-미 직접대화를 성사시키기 위해 의미가 혼란스러운 다자대화를 끼워 넣었을 수도 있다.

…북한이 6자회담에 복귀한다 해도 핵문제가 해결되리라는 기대를 하기 어려운 상황에서 겨우 양자와 다자대화의 운을 뗐을 뿐이다. 북한 관영 언론은 아무런 언급이 없어 김 위원장의 대화 재개 의사에 무게가 실렸다고 보기도 어렵다.

북한은 4월 “6자회담에 절대로 참여하지 않겠다”고 선언했다. 다자회담을 하자면서 3자회담이나 4자회담을 요구해 6자회담 참가국의 분열을 노릴 수도 있다. 북한의 과거 행태로 미루어 보면 대화 재개를 이유로 반대급부를 요구할 가능성도 있다. …김 위원장의 대화 제의에 우리가 솔깃할 수만은 없는 이유다.

[사설] 북핵 대전환 국면에 적극적 대처해야(한국일보, 2009년 9월 21일 39면, 발췌)

김정일 북한 국방위원장이 후진타오 중국 국가주석 특사 자격으로 방북한 다이빙궈 국무위원에게 한반도 비핵화를 위한 양자 및 다자 대화 참여의사를 밝혔다는 소식은 고무적이다. 6자 회담을 완강하게 거부해온 북한이 회담 복귀를 시사한 것으로 볼 수 있기 때문이다.

물론 중국 신화통신이 보도한 김 위원장 발언의 정확한 내용과 진의가 파악되기까지는 전망을 낙관하기 어렵다. …보다 분명한 흐름은 내달로 예상되는 북미 양자 대화와 원자바오 중국 총리의 방북 등을 통해 드러날 것이다. 그러나 최근 일련의 흐름으로 미뤄 북핵 문제는 전반적으로 대화의 흐름을 타고 있다고 봐도 무방하다.

정부는 이러한 흐름에 대해 "전후 맥락을 충분히 살펴볼 필요가 있다"며 신중한 자세를 보이고 있다.

북한이 어떤 의도와 조건을 내걸고 있는지 확인한 이후에 판단하겠다는 입장도 틀리지 않는다. 그러나 북핵 국면의 대전환 가능성에 대해 지나치게 소극적ㆍ수동적으로 임하는 게 아닌가 하는 생각을 떨칠 수가 없다. 통미봉남에 대한 우려로 북미관계 진전에 경계심을 풀지 않는 모습도 보이는 것도 소심하고 수세적 자세다.

지금은 제3차 북핵 위기 후 새로운 대화와 문제 해결의 틀이 모색되는 단계다. 우리 정부도 주도적 선제적으로 참여할 필요가 있다. 미국과 중국 중심으로 일단 판이 짜인 뒤 참여하게 되면 우리는 당사자임에도 한반도 문제에 제3자적 지위에 머물게 될 수 있음을 유념해야 한다. 유엔총회와 피츠버그 G20금융정상회의 참석을 위해 어제 출국한 이명박 대통령의 방미 일정은 북핵 문제의 새 국면에 대한 우리의 자세를 보다 주도적, 적극적 방향으로 가다듬고 재정립하는 기회가 되어야 한다.

▲중앙일보 영문 기사는 생략:DON'T FALL FOR NORTH'S TRICKS

[사설] 피츠버그 G20 정상회의에서 MB가 할 일(중앙일보, 2009년 9월 21일 46면)

이명박 대통령(MB)이 미국 뉴욕과 피츠버그에서 열리는 유엔 총회와 기후변화정상회의, 그리고 주요20개국(G20) 정상회의에 참석하기 위해 오늘 새벽 미국을 방문했다. 유엔 총회도 중요하고, 기후변화정상회의도 중요하지만 MB가 가장 큰 비중을 두고 있는 것은 피츠버그 G20 정상회의일 것이다. 정상회의 추가 개최 및 한국 유치 여부가 거기서 결정되기 때문이다. MB는 차기 회의의 개최 필요성과 한국 개최 당위성을 정상들에게 충분히 인식시킴으로써 내년 회의의 한국 개최를 성사시키는 데 혼신의 노력을 다해야 한다. G20 정상회의의 한국 개최는 국제사회에서 한국의 위상을 드높이는 결정적 계기가 될 수 있다고 보기 때문이다.

세계 국내총생산(GDP)의 85%를 차지하는 주요 20개국의 정상회의는 전대미문의 세계적 금융위기에 대처하기 위해 지난해 11월 워싱턴에서 주요7개국(G7)과 유럽연합(EU) 및 12개 신흥경제국 정상들이 회동한 데서 비롯됐다. 선진국들만의 힘으로는 위기를 극복할 수 없다는 공감대가 이뤄지면서 신흥경제국들의 참여로 탄생한 G20 정상회의는 금융위기 이후 달라진 세계질서의 판도를 상징하는 모임으로 떠올랐다. 올 4월 런던에서 2차 회의가 열린 데 이어 24, 25일 피츠버그에서 세 번째 정상회의가 열리는 것이다.

세계경제가 최악의 상황에서 벗어나 회복 국면에 들어섰다는 분석과 함께 G20 정상회의의 추가 개최 필요성에 대한 회의적 견해들이 일각에서 제기되고 있다. G20의 대표성에 의문을 제기하며 G13이나 G14로 수를 줄여야 한다는 주장도 유럽 쪽에서 나오고 있다. 우리로선 모두 불리한 견해들이다. 세계경제가 회복 기미를 보이고 있다지만 대대적인 재정확대 정책의 결과일 뿐이지 지속가능한 회복세로 돌아섰다고 단정하긴 이르다. 출구전략의 이행 시점에 대해서도 아직은 시기상조라는 견해가 지배적이다. 그런 만큼 G20 차원의 공조와 조율이 계속 필요한 상황이다.

G20 4차 정상회의의 한국 개최가 결정된다면 이는 G7이나 G8을 대체하는 세계경제의 새로운 ‘룰 메이커’로서 G20 정상회의의 정례화와 함께 한국이 그 일원으로 안착한다는 의미를 지닌다고 볼 수 있다. 한국은 이미 G20 재무장관 및 중앙은행 총재 회의의 일원이다. 더구나 내년엔 이 회의의 의장국이다. 세계에서 가장 먼저 금융위기에서 벗어나고 있는 한국은 선진국과 개도국 사이에서 ‘정직한 브로커’의 건설적 역할을 할 수 있는 유리한 입지에 있다. 어느 모로 보나 내년 G20 정상회의의 한국 개최는 자연스럽고 순리에 맞다. 피츠버그에서 MB가 피력해야 할 세일즈 포인트다. 

그러나 한국은 수출로 먹고살면서도 국제사회에 대한 기여엔 인색한 나라라는 인식이 엄존하고 있는 것도 사실이다. 어떤 노력으로 이런 부정적 인식을 불식시키느냐에 G20 정상회의의 유치는 물론이고, 한국의 국제적 위상의 미래가 달려 있다.

[사설]핵 협상 성공하도록 힘 모을 때(한겨레신문, 2009년 9월 21일, 27면)

상당히 속도감 있게 북한 핵 협상 국면으로 접어들고 있다. 김정일 북한 국방위원장은 지난 18일 “양자 또는 다자 대화를 통해 (비핵화 문제를) 해결하기를 희망한다”고 했고, 미국에선 ‘포괄적 패키지’를 진전시킨 대북 인센티브의 구체적 내용에 대한 논의가 마무리 단계다. 협상이 성공하도록 관련국 모두 힘을 모을 때다.

가장 중요한 것은 북한의 결단이다. 북한은 최근 대외적으로 유화 자세를 보이면서도 핵 포기에 대해서는 언급하지 않았다. 김정일 위원장이 18일 다이빙궈 중국 외교담당 국무위원에게 “비핵화 목표를 계속 견지할 것”이라고 밝혔다는 중국 쪽 보도가 사실이라면, 그런 뜻을 공개적으로 확실히 하고 적극적으로 관련 협상에 임해야 마땅하다. 6자회담 참여에 대한 태도 또한 분명히 해야 한다. 일부 비효율이 있더라도 6자회담을 근본적으로 대체할 다른 회담 틀을 생각하기 어려운 이상, 애매모호하게 ‘다자 대화’라고 해서는 관련국들의 의심을 살 뿐이다.

미국의 적극적 의지는 협상 성공의 필수 요건이다. 미국은 곧 있을 대북 접촉에서 북한의 핵 포기를 이끌어낼 수 있는 효과적 유인과 협상 방식에 대해 충분히 협의해야 할 것이다. 특히 첫 대화의 결과가 앞으로의 모든 협상을 좌우할 시금석이 될 수 있으므로, 서로 신뢰를 높일 수 있는 방안에 대한 고민이 필요하다. 북한의 핵 포기 의사 표명을 전제로 양쪽 연락사무소를 조기에 개설하는 것이 한 방안이다. 핵 문제에 집중해 대화 동력이 떨어지지 않도록 하는 일도 중요하다.

우리 정부는 북-미 대화 등 핵 협상에 소극적인 이제까지의 태도를 바꿔야 한다. 한반도 비핵화 과정에서 가장 핵심적인 것은 북한의 결단이지만, 그런 환경을 만드는 데는 관련국 모두 책임이 있다. 그럼에도 정부는 비핵화를 한반도 관련 모든 사안의 전제로 삼음으로써 스스로 입지를 위축시켜 왔다. 이런 태도는 앞으로 진척될 협상 국면에서 걸림돌로 작용할 가능성이 크다. 남북관계 진전과 핵 문제 해결 노력을 병행하면서 협상에 주도적 구실을 하는 쪽으로 대북정책을 바꿔야 한다.

한반도 비핵화는 어떤 경우에도 흔들리지 말아야 할 원칙이다. 북한이 핵보유국 인정이라는 환상을 갖지 않고 핵을 포기하게 하려면 관련국들이 협상에 진력하는 모습을 보여야 한다. 공동의 노력이 절실한 시기다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1501.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 SEOUL 001501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; September 21, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
University Graduates Failing to Land Regular Jobs 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
First Disclosure of College Scholastic Ability Test Scores 
from 2005 to 2009 by City and District 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Prime Minister Nominee Faces Tough Hearing; 
Nominee in Hot Seat over Relocation of Government Agencies to 
Central Region as Part of the Sejong City Project 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Survey Shows People Almost Evenly Divided 
over Sejong City Project 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
President Lee under Criticism for Ignoring Illegal Acts Committed by 
Nominees Named to High-ranking Positions and Trying to Go Ahead with 
Nominations 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
President Barack Obama told CNN on Sept. 20 that North Korean leader 
Kim Jong-il is "pretty healthy and in control." Obama's remarks come 
at a time when the U.S. is considering resuming bilateral talks with 
North Korea. (JoongAng, Hankyoreh, Hankook, Segye, Seoul, KBS, MBC) 
 
Kurt Campbell, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and 
Pacific Affairs, told reporters on Sept. 19 upon his return from 
Japan: "The U.S. is prepared to see whether indeed North Korea is 
prepared to come back responsibly to sit down in the Six-Party 
framework and again work toward what we are all seeking to achieve - 
a verifiable non-nuclear Korean Peninsula." This remark is in 
response to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il's recent statement that 
the North is willing to resolve its nuclear issue through both 
bilateral and multilateral talks. (Chosun) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
On Saturday (Sept. 19), all media front-paged a report by China's 
Xinhua New Agency quoting North Korean leader Kim Jong-il as telling 
visiting Chinese Presidential Envoy Dai Bingguo that his country is 
willing to participate in bilateral and multilateral talks. 
 
Most media noted Seoul's cautious response to the report, quoting a 
key Blue House official as saying: "The North did not say 
specifically that it will return to the Six-Party Talks.  We will 
check on what the North really means after the Chinese delegation 
returns home." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo described this development as proof that 
the current, unprecedented cooperation between the ROK, the U.S. and 
China to pressure North Korea is working.  Right-of-center JoongAng 
Ilbo wrote the headline: "U.S Calls for N. Korea to Return to 
Six-Party Talks Have Worked... Once This 'Big Obstacle' is Removed, 
Bosworth's Visit to N. Korea Likely to Happen Sooner."  Conservative 
Dong-a Ilbo's headline read: "North Korea's Cycle of Provocations, 
Sanctions, Mediations and Dialogue in Place Again?" 
 
Today, Chosun Ilbo carried an inside-page article entitled "U.S. 
Reacts with Caution to N. Korean Overtures."  It quoted Kurt 
Campbell, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific 
 
SEOUL 00001501  002 OF 008 
 
 
Affairs, as saying on Saturday that the U.S. would wait to see if 
North Korea is indeed prepared to return to the Six-Party Talks. 
The article also quoted a diplomatic source in Washington as saying: 
"One important reason why the North is trying to scrap the Six-Party 
Talks is to nullify the Sept. 19, 2005 statement of principles.  The 
U.S. Administration is aware of this, so it's being very cautious 
about changing the framework of talks." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized on Saturday: "North Korea 
declared in April that it will never rejoin the Six-Party Talks. 
While publicly proposing multilateral dialogue, the North may demand 
trilateral or four-party talks in order to drive a wedge between the 
Six-Party countries.  Judging from its past behavior, North Korea 
may also ask for a quid pro quo for resuming dialogue." 
 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo editorialized today: "There is nothing wrong 
with the ROKG's position that it will make a judgment after 
confirming what intentions and conditions the North has behind such 
overtures.  However, we cannot shake off the feeling that Seoul is 
too inactive or passive toward the possibility of a big change in 
addressing North Korea's nuclear issue.  ...  President Lee 
Myung-bak left for the U.S. yesterday to attend a meeting of the UN 
General Assembly and the G20 Financial Summit in Pittsburgh. 
President Lee should use this visit as an opportunity to take a 
leadership role at the same time as adopting a more active attitude 
toward this new development in the North Korean nuclear issue." 
 
-G 20 Summit in Pittsburgh 
-------------------------- 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized today: "The ROK is 
already a member of the meeting of the Group of 20 Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors, and will hold the presidency of the 
meeting next year.  The ROK, which is being touted as the first 
country to recover from the global financial crisis, is well 
positioned to play a constructive role as an 'honest broker' between 
the developed and developing countries.  In every respect, it is 
natural and reasonable for the ROK to host next year's G20 summit." 
 
-President Obama's Decision to Scrap Missile Defense Plans in 
Eastern Europe 
------------------------ 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun editorialized on Sept. 19: "This U.S. 
policy change, despite its denial, is aimed at improving ties with 
Russia.  Currently, the U.S. is in urgent need of Russia's help to 
resolve the issues of Iran and Afghanistan, the U.S.'s most 
important foreign policy goals at the moment.  Discussions also need 
to begin on a new agreement to take the place of the Strategic Arms 
Reduction Treaty with Russia, which is set to expire.  Russian 
President Dmitry Medvedev has indicated that he views Obama's 
decision as a responsible move and intends to respond in a 
forward-thinking way.  Obama's policy shift has shown the potential 
to bring the international order into an age of cooperation rather 
than conflict." 
 
 
Opinions/Editorials 
------------------- 
 
WILL OBAMA BE FOOLED? 
(Dong-a Ilbo, September 19, 2009, page 30: Excerpts) 
 
By Editorial writer Bang Hyung-nam 
 
The Obama Administration should have learned from the past the 
lessons of failed U.S. diplomacy in regard to the North Korean 
nuclear issue.  Instead, in a shift from a hard-line position, the 
Obama Administration accepted North Korea's overtures for bilateral 
talks.  Even a list of incentives the U.S. could provide to the 
North is being floated.  China tried to persuade Pyongyang to return 
to the Six-Party Talks through its chief envoy to the Six-Party 
Talks Wu Dawei.  But after its failed attempt, China sent Chinese 
State Councilor Dai Bingguo to Pyongyang to meet with North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il.  It is odd that the U.S. and China are being 
swayed by North Korea as if they themselves had done something 
 
SEOUL 00001501  003 OF 008 
 
 
wrong. 
 
The U.S. has already been deceived twice by North Korea over the 
nuclear issue.  Former President Bill Clinton signed the 1994 Geneva 
Agreed Framework through the U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks but 
couldn't block the North from its nuclear development.  Former 
President George W. Bush was fooled by the September 19 Joint 
Statement.  If President Obama enters into negotiations with North 
Korea, he will face North Korea's third nuclear scheme.  Will he be 
able to outmaneuver North Korea, unlike his predecessors? 
 
Recent moves by the U.S. government are stirring concerns.  The 
Obama Administration's initial position was that there is no 
alternative except the North's return to the Six-Party Talks.  Then, 
the U.S. Administration said that U.S.-North Korea talks will take 
place within the framework of the Six-Party Talks.  Now it has 
changed its position, saying that the U.S. can have bilateral 
negotiations with the North to facilitate the Six-Party Talks. 
Criticism is rife (over changes in USG positions) even in the U.S. 
 
 
President Obama chairs a nuclear summit at the UN Security Council 
on September 24.  He will also preside over the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference next May.  These 
are the steps toward realizing a nuclear-free world he espoused this 
April.  However, Obama's diplomacy will become futile if he does not 
resolve the North Korean nuclear issue, which is the most pressing 
issue.  Even if U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks take place, Obama 
should uphold the principle that the U.S. will not reward North 
Korea for its erroneous behavior.  We hope that the U.S. will not be 
deceived by North Korea's third nuclear scheme. 
 
 
KIM JONG-IL'S TRUE INTENTIONS BEHIND PROPOSAL FOR MULTILATERAL 
DIALOGUE 
(JoongAng Ilbo, September 21, 2009, Page 45) 
 
By Yoon Duk-min, Professor at the Institute of Foreign Affairs and 
National Security 
 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il recently told Chinese State 
Councilor Dai Bingguo that he "would like to resolve the 
denuclearization issue through bilateral and multilateral dialogue." 
 Some observers point out that (this means that) Pyongyang has 
finally yielded to international pressure, especially the trade 
embargo imposed by China.  Unsurprisingly, (Kim Jong-il's statement) 
fits with the tactical pattern of North Korean (foreign policy) that 
we've seen at least three times over the past two decades in which 
Pyongyang creates an external crisis in order to consolidate 
domestic control and, then, moves to address the outside situation. 
 
North Korea's behavior this year is almost similar to that during 
the first nuclear crisis in the early 1990s.  The only difference is 
the involvement of China.  During a meeting with former U.S. 
President Clinton, Kim Jong-il mentioned bilateral talks but did 
talk about a return to the Six-Party Talks, an issue which the North 
left for China, the host of the Six-Party Talks, to take up.  Since 
its nuclear and missile tests, the North has completely sidelined 
China.  While Kim Jong-il met with Clinton and Hyundai Group 
Chairwoman Hyun Jeong-eun and even sent a special delegation to 
President Lee Myung-bak, he did not allow Chinese Six-Party Talks 
chief Wu Dawei to meet with North Korean key officials during his 
recent visit to Pyongyang.  Concerned that Beijing might lose its 
leadership over Korean Peninsula issues, President Hu Jintao sent 
Dai Bingguo as his special envoy.  Although it looks as if Kim 
Jong-il, a master of brinkmanship diplomacy, "saved the face" of 
Beijing by referring to multilateral dialogue, Kim did not 
specifically mention the Six-Party Talks.  This tactic is the same 
as the one that the North employed in 2007.  At that time, the North 
made China anxious when it said in the October 4 Joint Declaration 
that peace on the Korean Peninsula can be addressed through "three 
or four-party dialogue" but did not specify whether China would be 
included in three-party talks. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001501  004 OF 008 
 
 
Through bilateral talks with the U.S., North Korea intends to 
establish diplomatic ties with the U.S. and, at the same time, gain 
recognition as a nuclear state, as India and Pakistan did.  To this 
end, Pyongyang is trying to break up international cooperation aimed 
at preventing the North from joining the nuclear club.  North Korea 
is hinting at denuclearization to the U.S., inter-Korean summit to 
the ROK, and the Six-Party Talks to China, respectively.  Toward the 
new Japanese government, the North is probably taking a conciliatory 
approach regarding the issue of abducted Japanese (citizens). 
 
Just because the Six-Party Talks resume does not mean that the 
nuclear issue will be resolved.  While the Six-Party Talks were 
under way, the North staged two nuclear tests.  What is most 
important in resolving the North Korean nuclear issue is for the 
ROK, the U.S., China, Japan, and Russia to show the North through 
action that, "unless it gives up its nuclear ambitions, it will 
suffer damage."  If even a single nation is deceived by the North 
into withdrawing from international cooperation, we will see North 
Korea conduct a third nuclear test and its nuclear possession 
accepted as a fait accompli. 
 
 
U.S. POLICY SWITCH IS A VICTORY IN RATIONALISM 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, September 19, 2009, Page 23) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama announced plans yesterday to scrap the 
George W. Bush Administration's installation of a missile defense 
(MD) system in Poland and the Czech Republic, and to build a new, 
more flexible MD system instead.  This is a welcome sign that U.S. 
foreign policy has begun to assume a basis in rational 
determinations. 
 
Despite its huge price tag, the Bush administration's MD policy has 
been criticized for having limited effectiveness and for needlessly 
generating international conflicts.  More than 90 billion dollars 
have been poured into the plan since its start in 2002, yet (the 
program's missile) interception rate has lingered below 50 percent 
in its more than ten-odd trials.  Some analysts have even suggested 
that the reason the Bush Administration persisted with the  program 
despite these lackluster results was because core policy makers like 
former Vice President Dick Cheney and former Secretary of Defense 
Donald Rumsfeld were in league with the military-industrial 
complex. 
 
The Bush Administration did not stop at building an MD base in 
Alaska, but also urged allies like South Korea and Japan to 
participate as well.  This is why the (U.S.'s) MD policy has irked 
China and Russia.  In particular, the decision that is at issue now, 
a December 2006 decision to introduce the MD system in Poland and 
the Czech Republic, has been a decisive factor in the worsening of 
U.S.-Russia relations.  The pretext was that (setting up an MD 
system within these countries) would protect Europe from long-range 
missile attacks from Iran and North Korea, however,(Moscow) viewed 
the move as a (threat to Russia). 
 
As a result, the Obama Administration's change in policy is, despite 
the Administration's denial, aimed at improving relations with 
Russia.  Currently, Russia's help is urgently needed for a solution 
to the issues of Iran and Afghanistan, the U.S.'s most important 
foreign policy goals at the moment.  (The U.S. also needs to begin 
discussion on a new agreement to take the place of the Strategic 
Arms Reduction Treaty with Russia, which is set to expire.  Russian 
President Dmitry Medvedev has indicated that he views Obama's 
decision as a responsible move and intends to respond in a 
forward-thinking way.  Obama's policy shift has shown the potential 
to bring the international order into an age of cooperation rather 
than conflict. 
 
South Korea in turn needs to mull over the meaning of the shift by 
the U.S. in MD policy.  Even within the ruling Democratic Party of 
Japan, there are growing calls to cut the MD budget.  Their 
determination is that, rather than sinking astronomical sums of 
money into building an ineffective defense network, it is more 
pragmatic to create the kind of international environment where 
 
SEOUL 00001501  005 OF 008 
 
 
missile launches can be avoided in the first place.  South Korea 
should make formulating a plan that can alleviate tensions a policy 
priority. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
WE SHOULD NOT BE OVERLY REACTIVE TO PYONGYANG'S HINT OF RETURNING TO 
MULTILATERAL TALKS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, September 19, 2009, Page 31, Excerpts) 
 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il expressed his intent yesterday (for 
North Korea) to return to dialogue aimed at resolving the North 
Korean nuclear issue.  Kim told visiting Chinese State Councilor Dai 
Bingguo that he "hopes to resolve the denuclearization issue through 
bilateral and multilateral dialogue."  This has now opened the 
possibility that dialogue may resume to resolve the North Korean 
nuclear issue.  Since the statement came as a result of China's 
efforts to persuade Pyongyang to return to dialogue by sending Dai 
Bingguo to Pyongyang as President Hu Jintao's Special Envoy, Kim's 
words are expected to be translated into action.  However, 
considering that Kim used the words "multilateral dialogue," which 
is a vague term that does not specify how many countries are 
involved in the talks, we cannot expect the Six-Party Talks to 
resume soon.  North Korea may have intentionally used the 
confusing-sounding term in order to (hint at its goal of) achieving 
direct dialogue with the U.S., which it has persistently demanded. 
 
In a situation where the North's return to the Six-Party Talks does 
not guarantee the resolution of the nuclear issue, Pyongyang simply 
mentioned its intent to hold bilateral and multilateral dialogue 
(and did not mention the resolution of the nuclear issue.)  North 
Korea's state news agency made no report about it, suggesting that 
Kim's expression of intent to rejoin dialogue does not carry much 
weight. 
 
North Korea declared in April that it will never rejoin the 
Six-Party Talks.  While publicly proposing multilateral dialogue, 
the North may demand trilateral or four-party talks in order to 
drive a wedge between the Six-Party countries.  Judging from its 
past behavior, North Korea may also ask for a quid pro quo for 
resuming dialogue.  This is why we cannot be overly reactive to 
Kim's proposal for dialogue. 
 
 
PREPARE FOR BIG CHANGE IN ADDRESSING N. KOREA'S NUCLEAR ISSUE 
(Hankook Ilbo, September 21, 2009, Page 39, Excerpts) 
 
It is encouraging that during a meeting with visiting Chinese State 
Councilor Dai Bingguo, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il expressed the 
intention (of North Korea) to join bilateral and multilateral 
dialogue aimed at denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula.  (It is 
encouraging) because, by this statement, Pyongyang seems to be 
hinting at its return to the Six-Party Talks, which it has strongly 
rejected.  The North Korean nuclear issue is now taking a new turn. 
 
It is, of course, difficult to be optimistic until we determine the 
accurate meaning and intention of Kim's reported statement.  A 
clearer picture will be revealed through U.S.-North Korea bilateral 
dialogue, which is expected to occur next month, and Chinese Premier 
Wen Jiabao's visit to Pyongyang.  Judging from recent developments, 
however, it is fair to say that the North Korean nuclear issue is in 
the stage of dialogue. 
 
Amid this situation, the ROKG is taking a cautious attitude, saying, 
"We need to fully examine in what context Kim's statement was made." 
 There is nothing wrong with the ROKG's position that it will make a 
judgment after confirming what intentions and conditions the North 
has behind such overtures.  However, we cannot shake off the feeling 
that Seoul is too inactive or passive toward the possibility of a 
big change in addressing North Korea's nuclear issue.  It also looks 
timid and defensive to be on the guard against any progress on 
U.S.-North Korea relations out of concern over North Korea's 
 
SEOUL 00001501  006 OF 008 
 
 
strategy of "promoting exchange with the United States and blocking 
off South Korea." 
 
After the third North Korean nuclear crisis, relevant nations are 
now in the phase of seeking a new framework of dialogue to resolve 
the issue.  The ROKG should play a leading and proactive role in 
this process.  It should remember that, if the U.S. and China lead 
the efforts to create a framework, the ROK, although a direct party 
to Korean Peninsula issues, would have to sit on the sideline. 
President Lee Myung-bak left for the U.S. yesterday to attend a 
meeting of the UN General Assembly and the G20 Financial Summit in 
Pittsburgh.  President Lee should use this visit as an opportunity 
to take a leadership role while at the same time adopting a more 
active attitude toward this new development in the North Korean 
nuclear issue. 
 
 
DON'T FALL FOR NORTH'S TRICKS 
(JoongAng Ilbo, September 19, 2009, Page 34) 
 
The North Korean nuclear issue is facing an important turning point. 
 The United States is getting ready to offer an incentive to North 
Korea before (holding) a bilateral meeting with the communist 
country, while China has dispatched a special envoy to Pyongyang in 
an attempt to coax the country into returning to the Six-Party 
Talks.  At the same time, Japanese Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada, a 
senior figure in the Democratic Party, previously said that the new 
administration will take "a tough stance" with North Korea, 
emphasizing that talks with the country will come only after the 
regime launches an investigation into its abduction of Japanese 
people and freezes nuclear and missile tests.  And Yu Myung-hwan, 
South Korean foreign minister, said on Friday, "I think resolving 
the nuclear issue should be prioritized before the inter-Korean 
issue." 
 
The U.S. and China seem to be reaching out, which is a different 
approach than the one Japan and South Korea are taking.  North Korea 
is trying to turn the tables in its favor by approaching South Korea 
and the United States in a friendly manner, taking advantage of its 
position after the release of two U.S. female journalists who were 
charged with trespassing.  And the U.S. government is seemingly 
responding positively, signaling that it wants to resolve the 
nuclear issue through dialogue now that it has discovered that 
sanctions alone won't work.  That is a so-called two-track strategy, 
which basically seems appropriate.  But for the strategy to succeed, 
prudent execution is necessary.  This, after all, is North Korea, a 
country that has successfully used skillful brinkmanship to get its 
way. 
 
The first step for success is to stick to the framework of the 
Six-Party Talks.  Immediately after the announcement of UN 
sanctions, North Korea proclaimed that the Six-Party Talks had 
"ended permanently."  North Korea, according to some observers, is 
attempting to induce the U.S. to withdraw its forces from South 
Korea by developing nuclear weapons.  Resolving the nuclear issue is 
closely tied to the peace of the Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia 
in a broader sense. 
 
The sanctions on the North should not be lifted until there is some 
real progress to report in terms of resolving the nuclear issue.  In 
the past 20 years of negotiations with North Korea, the country has 
always demanded the lifting of sanctions as a prerequisite to 
beginning negotiations.  Experts say that North Korea aims to catch 
up with India when it comes to the nuclear development race. 
 
But North Korea's possession of nuclear weapons is a scary 
proposition for the world.  It is a huge threat to this region and 
could trigger a nuclear domino effect across Northeast Asia. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
WHAT PRESIDENT LEE SHOULD DO AT G20 SUMMIT 
 
SEOUL 00001501  007 OF 008 
 
 
(JoongAng Ilbo, September 21, 2009, page 46) 
 
President Lee Myung-bak arrived in the U.S. this morning to attend 
the UN General Assembly, Climate Change Summit and G20 Summit, which 
will take place in New York and Pittsburgh.  Even though the UN 
General Assembly and Climate Change Summit are meaningful, what 
President Lee considers most important is the G20 Summit.  This is 
because, at the Summit, it will be decided where the next G20 Summit 
will be held and whether the ROK will be able to host it.  President 
Lee should make concentrated efforts to host the G20 Summit next 
year by having global leaders fully realize the necessity of the 
next Summit and the justification for the ROK's hosting.  The G20 
Summit, if held in the ROK, will provide a significant opportunity 
for the ROK to increase its status in the international community. 
 
 
The Summit for the G20 countries, which account for 85% of the 
(world's) GDP, was established when the G7 countries, the European 
Union (EU) and 12 emerging economies gathered in Washington in 
November 2008 to tackle the unprecedented global financial crisis. 
With the shared understanding that the crisis could not be overcome 
only through efforts by developed countries, the G20 Summit sought 
to involve countries with emerging economies, signaling a change in 
the structure of the world order in the wake of the financial 
crisis.  As a follow-up to the second G20 Summit in London this 
April, the third Summit will be held in Pittsburgh on September 24 
and 25. 
 
Analysts say that the world economy has surpassed its worst point 
and has entered into a recovery phase,,(making) some observers 
skeptical about the need to hold the additional G20 Summit.  Also, 
some European countries question the "representativeness" of the 
G20, arguing that the G20 should be decreased to the G13 or G14. 
These arguments, (if they are acted upon,) would be to our 
disadvantage.  Even though the world economy has shown signs of 
recovery, (the upturn) is just a result of (sudden) fiscal 
expansion, and it is too early to say that the economy is moving 
toward sustainable recovery.  The prevailing opinion is that it is 
too early to implement an exit strategy now.  Therefore, G20 
countries should continue to cooperate together. 
 
If it is decided that the ROK hosts the fourth G20 Summit, this 
signifies that the G20 Summit will serve as a new "rule maker" of 
the world economy, replacing the G7 or G8 summit.  The ROK is 
already a member of the meeting of the Group of 20 Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors, and will hold the presidency of the 
meeting next year.  The ROK, which is being touted as the first 
country to recover from the global financial crisis, is well 
positioned to play a constructive role as an 'honest broker' between 
the developed and developing countries.  In every respect, it is 
natural and reasonable for the ROK to host next year's G20 summit. 
This is a point President Lee should stress in Pittsburgh. 
 
However, the harsh reality is that there are some (who believe) that 
the ROK is too reliant on overseas exports and makes small 
contributions to the international community.  The ROK should make 
every effort to dispel this negative perception in order to host the 
G20 Summit and enhance its international status. 
 
 
IT IS TIME TO MAKE CONCERTED EFFORTS FOR SUCCESSFUL NUCLEAR 
NEGOTIATIONS 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, September 21, 2009, page 27) 
 
The U.S. and North Korea are swiftly moving to enter into nuclear 
negotiations.  On September 18, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il 
expressed willingness to resolve the denuclearization issue through 
bilateral or multilateral talks.  The U.S. is engaging in final 
discussions to lay out specific incentives for the North.  All 
countries concerned should make concerted efforts for successful 
negotiations. 
 
What matters most is North Korea's resolution.  Pyongyang has made 
conciliatory gestures toward the outside world without, however, 
 
SEOUL 00001501  008 OF 008 
 
 
mentioning any intention to abandon its nuclear program.  According 
to a Chinese source, Kim Jong-il told Chinese State Councilor Dai 
Bingguoon on September 18 that North Korea will seek the goal of 
denuclearization.  If this is true, Pyongyang should make its 
position clear to the world and proactively engage in related 
negotiations.  The North also should clarify whether it will 
participate in the Six-Party Talks.  There is no other framework 
that can fundamentally replace the Six-Party Talks, (which should 
continue) even if they are somewhat ineffective.  Therefore, North 
Korea's equivocal remarks on multilateral talks only invite 
suspicion from related countries. 
 
The U.S.'s active commitment is a requisite for successful 
negotiations.  The U.S. should go through full consultations to come 
up with effective incentives and ways of negotiations in order to 
get North Korea to give up its nuclear ambition at the upcoming 
U.S.-North Korea talks.  In particular, since the outcome of initial 
dialogue could become an important test to determine all future 
negotiations, the two nations should think about ways to increase 
mutual trust.  They could establish a liaison office in each other's 
countries on the condition that North Korea expresses the intention 
to abandon its nuclear programs.  It is also important that they 
should focus on the nuclear issue so that momentum of dialogue may 
not be lost. 
 
The ROKG, for its part, should abandon its passive attitude toward 
nuclear negotiations, including the U.S.-North Korea dialogue.  The 
key to the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is (premised on) 
a decision by North Korea (to abandon its nuclear program), but all 
relevant nations share the responsibility to create an environment 
where Pyongyang will make a wise decision.  Nevertheless, the ROKG 
has lost its ground by making all Korean Peninsula issues 
conditional on denuclearization.  This attitude is highly likely to 
become a stumbling block to future negotiations.  Seoul should 
change its North Korea policy in a way that will allow it to take a 
leadership role in negotiations while making efforts to advance 
inter-Korean relations and resolve the nuclear issue. 
 
(We should not sway in our support for) the principle of 
denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula under any circumstances. 
In order to persuade Pyongyang to give up the illusion that it can 
be recognized as a nuclear state and to abandon its nuclear 
programs, relevant nations should demonstrate their strong 
commitment toward negotiations.  Now is the time when joint efforts 
are desperately needed. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>