^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1946 | 2009-12-14 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 14일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001946

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 14일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/09/07 18:33//

===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 중앙일보, 동아일보, 한국일보, 모든 텔레비전
북 미사일 실은 화물기 첫 억류

한겨레 신문, 서울 신문
[사설]북한 무기 압류, ‘제2의 비디에이 사태’ 되지 않아야

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

태국 당국이 12일 미국측 정보를 받아 35톤의 무기를 싣고 북한을 출발한 항공기를 압류하고 승무원 5명을 억류하였다. 이번 태국 당국의 조치는 북한을 드나드는 무기 운송을 금지하는 유엔안보리 결의 1874호에 따른 것이다. (전체)

한국 정부 당국자는 “미국이 의미 있는 비핵화 조치가 실현되기 전까지는 대화와 제재를 병행한다는 ‘투 트랙 접근법’을 분명히 보여주는 사례”라고 말했다. (중앙)

지난 9일 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표와 강석주 북한 외무성 제1부상의 평양 대화와 관련, 정부 관계자는 13일 “북한이 보즈워스 특사에게 던진 메시지는 6자회담 복귀를 위해 북한의 체면을 살려달라(“save face”)는 것”이라고 말했다. (중앙)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

북한산 무기를 운반하던 그루지야 국적 화물기가 태국에서 압류되었다는 소식이 언론에 대서 특필되었다. 한국 언론은 이번 태국 당국의 조치는 북한산 무기의 반출입을 금지하는 유엔안보리 결의 1874호에 따른 것이라고 보도했다. 언론은 또 유엔 안보리가 6월에 대북 결의를 채택한 이후로 북한산 무기를 수송하는 항공기를 적발된 사례는 이번이 처음이라고 덧붙였다.

대다수 언론은 이번 사건이 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 12월 8일 평양 방문 직후에 벌어졌기 때문이 12월 8일 북미 관계에 부정적인 영향을 미칠 수 있다고 추정했다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 한국 당국자가 “미국이 의미 있는 비핵화 조치가 실현되기 전까지는 대화와 제재를 병행한다는 ‘투 트랙 접근법’을 분명히 보여주는 사례”라고 말했다고 전했다.

보수 조선일보 사설: "무기 수출은 북한의 주요 외화(外貨) 수입원이다. 그러나 무기 밀거래는 북한 경제를 일으켜 세우고 북한 주민을 굶주림에서 구하는 방편이 될 수 없다. …북한 권력의 관심은 오직 현 체제의 유지이고, 자신들의 권력을 지키는 데 필요한 경비를 불법 무기 거래에서 조달하겠다는 낡은 발상에서 벗어나지 못하고 있다는 사실을 이번 북한제 미사일과 폭약 압류 사건에서 또 한 번 확인하게 된다."

중도 우파 중앙일보가 주장한 사설 내용: "이번 사건이 모처럼 조성된 북·미 간 대화 분위기에 찬물을 끼얹지 않기를 바라지만 북한도 명심해야 할 것이 있다. 과거처럼 시간이 지나면 유엔 제재가 흐지부지될 것이라는 기대는 환상에 불과하다는 점이다."

북한이 제재에서 벗어날 수 있는 유일한 길은 6자회담에 복귀해 핵 포기 의사를 분명히 밝히는 것뿐이다."

보수 동아일보 사설: "북한이 무기 수송에 항공기를 이용한 점도 우려되는 대목이다. 북한은 선박 감시가 강화되자 국제사회의 눈을 속이기 위해 항공 수송을 시도한 것으로 보인다. …이번 일을 보더라도 국제사회가 대북 제재를 늦추거나 경각심을 풀어서는 안 된다."

지난 9일 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표와 강석주 북한 외무성 제1부상의 평양 대화와 관련, 정부 관계자는 13일 “북한이 보즈워스 특사에게 던진 메시지는 6자회담 복귀를 위해 북한의 체면을 살려달라(“save face”)는 것”이라고 말했다.

대다수 언론은 보즈워스 대사가 12일 북한과 바로 대화를 더 할 계획은 없다며 북한의 비핵화를 모색하는 국가에 대해 "전략적 인내"를 촉구했다는 외신 보도를 되풀이했다.

중도 한국일보는 사설에서 미국과 북한이 보스워즈의 평양 방문 기간 중에 중국과 한국이 함께하는 '4자틀' 안에서 한반도 평화 체제를 논의하기로 합의했다는 언론 보도를 거론하며 이렇게 말했다: "완전한 비핵화를 조건으로 전면적 관계정상화, 영구적 평화체제, 획기적 경제지원을 약속한'포괄적 패키지'는 우리 정부의'그랜드 바겐'제안과 다르지 않다. …평화체제 논의는 한미 동맹에 미칠 영향 등 민감한 쟁점들이 얽혀 있어 신중하게 대비해야 한다. 그러나 6자 회담과 비핵화 협상 재개에 도움된다면 일단 긍정적으로 평가한다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설] 미국과 대화 문 열고 무기 밀거래 나선 북한의 이중성**(조선일보, 2009년 12월 14일 35면)

태국 정부는 12일 평양발(發) 그루지야 국적의 수송기가 재급유를 위해 태국 돈무앙 공항에 착륙하자 수색을 실시해 미사일과 폭약 등 35t의 북한산 무기를 압류하고 조종사 등 승무원 5명을 체포했다고 밝혔다. 아피싯 웨차치와 태국 총리는 13일 "태국 법과 유엔 결의에 따른 조치"라고 밝혔다. 일부 외신은 이 비행기의 최종 목적지가 미국과 탈레반 사이에 치열한 전투가 벌어지고 있는 파키스탄이라고 보도했다.

유엔 안보리는 북한이 지난 5월 25일 2차 핵실험을 실시하자 제재 결의(決議) 1874호를 채택, 북한과의 일체의 무기 거래를 금지시켰다. 이번에 적발된 북한의 무기 밀거래 시도는 안보리 결의 위반이고, 더 큰 제재를 부를 수밖에 없다. 지난 8월에도 아랍에미리트(UAE)가 제3국 선박에서 북한제 무기를 압수했고, 북한 선박 강남호가 미얀마 방향으로 항해하다 미국의 추적을 받자 북한으로 되돌아가기도 했다.

북한은 미국 보즈워스 대표가 오바마 대통령 특사 자격으로 평양을 방문했던 지난 8~10일을 전후한 시기에 미사일과 폭약을 이번에 억류된 항공기에 싣고 있었던 것으로 추정된다. 1년여 만에 미·북 대화에 나선 북한이 뒤로는 몰래 불법 무기 거래에 나선 것이다. 북한이 미·북 대화가 시작된 만큼 무기 밀거래에 대한 국제 감시가 약화됐을 것이라고 생각했다면 오판이다. 국제사회는 북한과의 대화와 관계없이 유엔 결의에 따른 대북 제재를 강력히 추진하겠다는 입장이다. 스리랑카에서 재급유를 받으려던 그루지야 수송기가 태국에 착륙한 것도 미국을 비롯한 국제사회의 감시와 추적 때문일 가능성이 높다.

무기 수출은 북한의 주요 외화(外貨) 수입원이다. 그러나 무기 밀거래는 북한 경제를 일으켜 세우고 북한 주민을 굶주림에서 구하는 방편이 될 수 없다. 한·미와 국제사회는 북한이 핵과 미사일을 포기하면 과감한 대북 지원에 나서겠다는 입장을 거듭 밝히고 있다. 북한 권력은 북한 경제와 주민을 살리는 길을 외면하고 있다. 북한 권력의 관심은 오직 현 체제의 유지이고, 자신들의 권력을 지키는 데 필요한 경비를 불법 무기 거래에서 조달하겠다는 낡은 발상에서 벗어나지 못하고 있다는 사실을 이번 북한제 미사일과 폭약 압류 사건에서 또 한 번 확인하게 된다.

**[사설]미사일 수출에 광분하는 北, 핵 확산도 위험하다**(동아일보, 2009년 12월 14일, 35면)

북한이 무기를 수출하려다 또 적발됐다. 12일 태국에서 적발된 그루지야 국적 항공기에는 미사일과 로켓포탄 등 35t의 무기가 실려 있었던 것으로 알려졌다. 무기의 최종 목적지는 우크라이나라고 태국 언론이 보도해 조사 결과에 따라 파장이 확산될 것으로 전망된다. 북이 유엔의 대북(對北)제재 결의 1874호에도 아랑곳하지 않고 불법 무기 수출에 매달리고 있음이 드러났다. 유엔은 북한의 장거리 미사일 발사와 2차 핵실험에 대한 제재로 6월 소형무기를 제외한 모든 무기와 관련 물자의 수출을 금지했다.

북한이 무기 수송에 항공기를 이용한 점도 우려되는 대목이다. 북한은 선박 감시가 강화되자 국제사회의 눈을 속이기 위해 항공 수송을 시도한 것으로 보인다. 8월에는 아랍에미리트가 이란으로 향하던 제3국 선박에서 북한 무기를 압류했고, 9월에는 부산에서 방호복을 비롯한 북한 관련 화물이 적발됐다. 올해 7월에는 무기를 선적한 것으로 의심받던 북한 선박 강남1호가 미얀마로 향하다 미군 함정의 추적을 받자 회항했다. 북한이 무기 수송수단을 다양화하면서 하늘과 바다에서 숨바꼭질이 벌어지고 있다.

태국에서 적발된 항공기는 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책특별대표가 방북을 마치고 떠난 다음 날 평양 순안공항을 출발했다. 북한은 보즈워스 대표가 평양에 머무는 동안 무기를 옮기고 그가 떠난 직후에 출발시켰다. 대화가 진행되는 동안 미국의 감시가 소홀해지리라고 기대한 것일까. 미국 대표를 불러놓고 뒤편에서 무기 수출을 기도한 북한이 진정으로 북-미 화해에 나섰다고 믿기도 어렵다. 

유엔의 대북제재 결의 1718호와 1874호는 핵과 미사일을 포함한 북한의 대량살상무기(WMD) 확산을 막기 위한 비상대책이다. 이번 일을 보더라도 국제사회가 대북 제재를 늦추거나 경각심을 풀어서는 안 된다. 상대를 가리지 않고 무기를 파는 북한이기에 WMD 수출을 수지맞는 사업으로 생각할 수도 있다. 노골적으로 우라늄 농축을 확대하고 있는 이란의 사례에서 보듯 핵무기와 기술에 대한 국제적 수요가 엄연히 존재한다.

대북 제재를 위한 유엔 결의에 국제사회가 적극적으로 협력하고 있음은 다행이다. 태국은 이번에 미국의 정보 제공에 따라 북한 무기를 실은 항공기 억류와 함께 무기를 압수하고 승무원 5명을 기소할 예정이다. 국제사회가 이처럼 결연하게 대응해야 유엔 결의를 무시한 북의 평화 파괴 행위를 봉쇄할 수 있다.

**[사설]북한 무기 압류, ‘제2의 비디에이 사태’ 되지 않아야**(한겨레신문, 2009년 12월 14일, 31면)

미사일 등 북한제 무기를 적재한 수송기가 그제 타이의 공항에 억류되고 무기가 압류되는 일이 일어났다. 비행기와 승무원 5명의 국적은 모두 옛소련 지역 나라들이지만, 이 비행기가 평양에서 출발한 것으로 봐서 북한의 수출용 무기가 분명한 듯하다. 무기의 양도 적어도 35톤에 이르는 등 적잖은 규모다. 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 북한을 다녀온 직후 일어난 악재다.

북한의 무기 수출은 유엔 결의에 위배된다. 올봄 북한의 핵실험 이후 채택된 유엔 안보리 결의는 북한의 거의 모든 무기를 금수 대상으로 지정하고 있다. 북한은 이 결의를 인정하지 않지만 유엔 회원국은 결의 내용을 이행할 의무를 지닌다. 따라서 앞으로 제재위원회 등 유엔 기구가 어떤 판단을 내릴지 등을 둘러싸고 북한과 관련국들 사이에 상당한 갈등이 생길 수 있다.

6자회담 재개에 미칠 악영향도 우려된다. 보즈워스 대표의 지난 8~10일 방북을 계기로 북한은 회담 복귀에 한 발짝 더 다가선 상태다. 앞으로 한 차례 더 북-미 고위급 접촉이 있은 뒤 회담이 열릴 것으로 전문가들은 내다본다. 이런 움직임은 비핵화 과정의 큰 틀에 대한 합의가 이뤄져가고 있음을 뜻한다. 또한 회담이 다시 시작되면 과거의 실패에 대한 반성을 바탕으로 좀더 실효성 있는 협상이 진행될 것으로 기대된다. 하지만 이번 일이 국제 여론에 나쁜 영향을 끼친다면 회담 재개가 늦춰질 수 있다. 2005년 9·19 공동성명 합의 즈음에 일어난 방코델타아시아(BDA) 사태가 거의 1년 반 동안 6자회담을 막은 일이 되풀이될 수도 있는 것이다.

국제사회는 이번 일을 유엔 결의의 정신에 따라 신속하게 처리하되 불필요한 갈등이 증폭되지 않도록 할 필요가 있다. 비디에이 사태 때처럼 대북 강경파들이 핵협상을 좌절시킬 목적으로 이번 일을 활용하는 경우가 없어야 함은 물론이다. 북한 또한 이미 드러난 사실을 갖고 엉뚱하게 고집부리는 모습을 보여서는 안 된다. 북한은 결국 비핵화 과정이 진전돼야 자신에 대한 국제 제재가 풀릴 수 있음을 명심해야 한다.

6자회담이 재개돼 성과를 내려면, 돌발사태가 생기더라도 중심을 잡으며 꾸준히 신뢰를 쌓아가려는 노력이 모두에게 중요하다. 특히 북한은 이번 일을 자신의 태도를 점검할 시금석으로 삼아야 마땅하다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 한반도 평화체제 '4자 대화' 바람직하다**(한국일보, 12월 13일, 39면)

북한과 미국이 6자 회담 재개를 전제로 평화협정 체결 등 한반도 평화체제를 논의하는 남북한과 미국, 중국의'4자 대화'에 합의했다고 한다. 보즈워스 대북특사의 방북 때 이같이 양해한 것으로 알려졌다. 각기 비핵화와 평화체제를 선결조건으로 내세웠던 양쪽이 두 문제를 별도 회담에서 논의하기로 타협한 셈이다. 우리 정부가 비핵화와 평화체제를 평화구조의 상호보완적 양축으로 제시해온 점에 비춰 바람직한 진전이다.

정전협정을 대체하는 평화협정 등 평화체제의 필요성은 1991년 남북 기본합의서와 1997년 제네바 4자 회담 등에서 줄곧 거론됐다. 북미 양국은 2000년 조명록 특사의 방미 때 평화협정을 위한 '4자 회담'을 언급했다. 이어 2005년 6자 회담의 9.19 공동성명은'직접 관련당사국'의 평화체제 논의를 별도로 추진하기로 합의했다.

그러나 지금껏 아무런 진전 없이 6자 회담에서도 부수적으로 다뤄졌다. 북한이 장거리 로켓 발사에 대응한 유엔 안보리 제재를 이유로 6자 회담을 거부한 것은 비핵화 협상을 평화체제 협상으로 이끌려는 의도로 풀이됐다. 북한은 미국의 위협과 핵우산 제거 등을 비핵화의 전제조건으로 내세웠다.

이번 합의는 북한의 요구를 적극 수용한 것이다. 그러나 6자 회담 복귀를 전제로 못박고, 한국이 직접 당사국임을 확인한 것은 한미 양국의 공통적 입장과 일관된 것이다. 미국은 북한의 6자 회담 복귀를 압박하는 동시에 '대안의 길'을 제시해 왔다. 완전한 비핵화를 조건으로 전면적 관계정상화, 영구적 평화체제, 획기적 경제지원을 약속한'포괄적 패키지'는 우리 정부의'그랜드 바겐'제안과 다르지 않다. 그제 미사일 등 북한제 무기를 실은 그루지야 수송기를 태국에서 억류한 것은 압박과 대화를 병행할 의지를 과시한 것으로 볼만 하다.

평화체제 논의는 한미 동맹에 미칠 영향 등 민감한 쟁점들이 얽혀 있어 신중하게 대비해야 한다. 그러나 6자 회담과 비핵화 협상 재개에 도움된다면 일단 긍정적으로 평가한다.

**[사설] 제재·대화 병행 원칙 확인한 북한산 무기 압류 조치**(중앙일보, 2009년 12월 14일, 38면)

북한제 무기를 실은 화물기가 그제 태국에서 억류됐다. 북·미 간 고위급 회담이 끝난 지 이틀 만이다. 대화와 제재를 분리하는 오바마 행정부의 투 트랙 전략 이행 의지를 분명히 보여주는 사례로 평가된다. 북한이 대화에 나오면 슬그머니 제재가 자취를 감추던 부시 행정부 때의 패턴을 반복하지 않겠다는 것이다.

현재까지 알려진 바로는 북한이 유엔 안보리 결의 1874호를 위반한 것은 확실해 보인다. 미사일 20여기, 대전차 로켓포 48기 등 35t의 북한제 무기를 적재한 평양발 그루지야 국적 화물기를 재급유 과정에서 태국 당국이 검색·억류했고, 그 배경에는 미 정보 당국의 협조 요청이 있었다고 한다. 더 자세한 경위는 태국 당국의 조사 결과가 나와봐야 알겠지만 제3국기를 이용해 북한이 무기 수출을 시도하다 적발된 정황은 명백해 보인다.

북한의 2차 핵실험에 따라 6월 채택된 안보리 결의 1874호는 북한산 무기의 수출입을 금지하고 있다. 이 결의 11조와 14조는 ‘금지물품을 적재하고 있다고 믿을 합리적 근거가 있을 경우 항구와 공항 등에서 북한행, 북한발 화물을 검색한다’ ‘금지품목을 발견했을 경우 압류하고 처분 결과를 제재위원회에 보고한다’고 규정하고 있다. 태국은 미국으로부터 통보받은 정보를 근거로 화물기를 검색하고, 무기를 압류한 것으로 보인다. 8월 아랍에미리트(UAE)는 이란으로 향하던 제3국 선박에서 북한제 무기를 압류했고, 6월 말에는 무기를 실은 것으로 의심되는 북한 선박이 미얀마로 추정되는 목적지를 향해 가다 미 함정의 추적 끝에 회항한 사건도 있었다. 안보리 결의를 무시한 북한의 무기 수출은 현실적으로 어렵다는 점이 점점 분명해지고 있는 것이다.

이번 사건이 모처럼 조성된 북·미 간 대화 분위기에 찬물을 끼얹지 않기를 바라지만 북한도 명심해야 할 것이 있다. 과거처럼 시간이 지나면 유엔 제재가 흐지부지될 것이라는 기대는 환상에 불과하다는 점이다. 북한이 제재에서 벗어날 수 있는 유일한 길은 6자회담에 복귀해 핵 포기 의사를 분명히 밝히는 것뿐이다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1946.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001946 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 14, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, JoongAng Ilbo, Dong-a Ilbo, 
Hankook Ilbo, All TVs 
Arms Cargo from N. Korea Seized in Thailand 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun, Seoul Shinmun 
N. Korean Weapons Seizure May Affect U.S.-N. Korea Dialogue 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------- 
 
On Dec. 12, Thai authorities, reportedly acting on a tip from their 
U.S. counterparts, seized 35 tons of weapons on a plane that flew 
from North Korea and arrested five crew members on board. This Thai 
action was in line with UN Security Council Resolution 1874 banning 
the transportation of weapons to or from North Korea. (All) 
 
An ROKG official commented that the seizure clearly demonstrated 
Washington's "two-track" approach: applying pressure on the North 
through tough international sanctions while keeping the door open 
for dialogue until the North takes significant steps to 
denuclearize. (JoongAng) 
 
Referring to the Dec. 9 talks in Pyongyang between Ambassador 
Bosworth and North Korea's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju, 
an ROKG source said on Dec. 13 that North Korea's message to 
Ambassador Bosworth is that in order for the North to return to the 
Six-Party Talks, (the U.S.) should create an atmosphere in which the 
North can "save face." (JoongAng) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
--------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
The seizure in Thailand of a Georgian cargo plane carrying 35 tons 
of North Korean weapons received wide press coverage today. 
According to media reports, this Thai action was in line with UN 
Security Council Resolution 1874 banning the transportation of 
weapons from or to North Korea.  It is also the first time an 
airplane carrying North Korean weapons has been caught since the UN 
Security Council adopted sanctions in June, according to media 
reports. 
 
Most media speculated that this incident may have a negative impact 
on U.S.-North Korea relations, because it came shortly after the 
Dec. 8 visit to Pyongyang by U.S. Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo quoted an ROKG official as commenting 
that the seizure clearly demonstrated Washington's "two-track" 
approach: applying pressure on the North through tough international 
sanctions while keeping the door open for dialogue until the North 
takes significant steps to denuclearize. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "Selling weapons has long 
been regarded as a major cash cow for North Korea.  However, arms 
smuggling cannot be a means to revive the North Korean economy and 
to save North Korean citizens from starvation. ... This incident 
once again confirms that Pyongyang's only interest is in maintaining 
its regime and that it remains preoccupied with obtaining funds 
needed to maintain its power through illegal arms deals." 
 
An editorial in right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo argued: "Although we 
hope that this incident will not pour cold water on the hard-won 
atmosphere for dialogue between North Korea and the U.S., there is 
one thing that the North should bear in mind: It is just an illusion 
to think that UN sanctions, as in the past, will not be effective. 
 
SEOUL 00001946  002 OF 006 
 
 
The only way for the North to escape the sanctions is to return to 
the Six-Party Talks and to clearly express its intention to abandon 
its nuclear ambitions." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized: "Another worrisome factor is 
that North Korea used an aircraft for weapons transport this time. 
Pyongyang has apparently used air transport to deceive the world 
after scrutiny was raised on its ships. ... The latest incident 
shows that the world should never relax sanctions on North Korea and 
let its guard down." 
 
With regard to the Dec. 9 talks in Pyongyang between Ambassador 
Bosworth and North Korea's First Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju, 
JoongAng Ilbo carried a report quoting an ROKG source as saying on 
Dec. 13: "North Korea's message to Ambassador Bosworth is that in 
order for the North to return to the Six-Party Talks, (the U.S.) 
should create an atmosphere in which the North can "save face." 
 
Most media replayed foreign media reports that Ambassador Bosworth 
said in Beijing on Dec. 12 that there is no immediate plan for more 
talks with North Korea and urged "strategic patience" from the 
countries seeking the North's nuclear disarmament. 
 
An editorial in moderate Hankook Ilbo noted media reports that the 
U.S. and North Korea agreed during Ambassador Bosworth's visit to 
Pyongyang to discuss a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula in a 
'four-nation setting' with the ROK and China, and commented: "The 
'comprehensive package,' which promises normalization of diplomatic 
ties, a permanent peace regime and massive economic assistance in 
return for the North's complete denuclearization, is not different 
from our government's 'grand bargain' proposal.  ...  We should be 
prudent in preparing for discussions on a peace regime because the 
talks involve other sensitive issues that could affect the ROK-U.S. 
alliance.  However, if such talks help to restart the Six-Party 
Talks and other denuclearization negotiations, we view them 
positively." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
ARMS DEALS HIGHLIGHT N. KOREA'S DUPLICITY 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 14, 2009, Page 35) 
 
While searching a Georgian cargo aircraft from Pyongyang during a 
refueling stop at Bangkok's Don Muang Airport on Saturday, Thai 
authorities found 35 tons of North Korean weapons aboard, including 
missiles and explosives, and arrested five crewmembers including the 
pilot.  Thai Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said on Sunday the 
measure was based on Thai laws and on UN (Security Council) 
Resolution 1874.  Some reports said the final destination of the 
plane was Pakistan, near whose border U.S. forces are engaged in a 
fierce battle against the Taliban. 
 
The UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1874 following North 
Korea's second nuclear test on May 25 banning all weapons-related 
transactions with the North.  North Korea's attempted smuggling of 
weapons is a clear violation of the resolution and will inevitably 
lead to stronger sanctions against North Korea.  In August, the 
United Arab Emirates seized a vessel laden with North Korean 
weapons, while another North Korean cargo ship, the Kangnam, was 
forced to return to its home port on its way to Myanmar after being 
tracked by the U.S. Navy. 
 
North Korea is believed to have loaded the Georgian aircraft with 
missiles and explosives last Tuesday or Wednesday, just when U.S. 
special envoy on North Korea policy Stephen Bosworth was visiting 
Pyongyang.  In other words, the North was busily selling weapons 
even as it was holding its first dialogue with the U.S. in a year. 
Pyongyang is seriously mistaken if it believes the resumption of 
dialogue with the U.S. signals an easing of surveillance of its arms 
dealings.  Regardless of U.S.-North Korea talks, the international 
community is willing to enforce UN sanctions against North Korea. 
Indeed, the Georgian aircraft, which was scheduled to refuel in Sri 
 
SEOUL 00001946  003 OF 006 
 
 
Lanka, may have made an emergency landing in Thailand as a result of 
surveillance and tracking efforts by the international community. 
 
Selling weapons has long been regarded as a major cash cow for North 
Korea.  However, arms smuggling cannot be a means to revive the 
North Korean economy and to save North Korean citizens from 
starvation.  The ROK, the U.S. and the international community have 
made it clear that they are willing to offer economic aid and 
support to North Korea if it abandons its nuclear weapons and 
missile programs.  But the regime is not interested in saving North 
Korean lives.  This incident once again confirms that Pyongyang's 
only interest is in maintaining its regime and that it remains 
preoccupied with obtaining funds needed to maintain power through 
illegal arms deals. 
 
 
NK CAUGHT AGAIN FOR EXPORTING WEAPONS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, December 14, 2009, Page 35) 
 
North Korea has been caught yet again for trying to export weapons. 
The cargo aircraft seized yesterday in Thailand reportedly contained 
35 tons of weapons, including missiles and rocket launchers.  This 
shows that the North continues to export weapons in defiance of U.N. 
Security Council Resolution 1874 passed in June, which bans 
Pyongyang from exporting all weapons-related material excluding 
small weapons.  The resolution is part of the sanctions (implemented 
resulting from) the North's long-range missile program and its 
second nuclear test. 
 
Another worrisome factor is that this time North Korea used an 
aircraft for weapons transport.  Pyongyang has apparently used air 
transport to deceive the world after scrutiny was raised on its 
ships.  In August, the United Arab Emirates seized North Korean 
weapons in a ship from a third country headed for Iran.  A month 
later, North Korean cargo, including body armor, was intercepted in 
the ROK port of Busan.  Back in June, the North Korean ship Kangnam 
1, which was suspected of carrying weapons, had to sail back to 
North Korea when an American vessel began tailing it.  With its 
adoption of the air transport method, Pyongyang is playing 
hide-and-seek with the world both at sea and in the sky. 
 
North Korea is also taking advantage of bilateral talks with the 
U.S. while exporting weapons.  The cargo aircraft detained in 
Thailand had left Pyongyang two days after Stephen Bosworth, U.S. 
special envoy for North Korea policy, returned home from his visit 
to the North Korean capital.  The weapons were delivered while 
Bosworth was in Pyongyang, then the plane took off immediately after 
he left.  North Korea might have expected U.S. surveillance to 
weaken while Bosworth was in Pyongyang.  It is hard to believe that 
North Korea truly wants to reconcile with the U.S. since it 
attempted to export weapons behind Washington's back while bilateral 
talks were in progress. 
 
U.N. Security Council Resolutions 1718 and 1874 are emergency 
measures to prevent the North from spreading weapons of mass 
destruction, including nuclear weapons and missiles.  The latest 
incident shows that the world should never relax sanctions on North 
Korea and let its guard down.  For a nation that sells weapons to 
whomever it wants, North Korea might be led to believing that 
exporting WMDs is a profitable business.  As seen with Iran, a rogue 
country that has openly expanded its uranium enrichment program, 
there is clearly international demand for nuclear weapons and 
technology. 
 
Fortunately, many nations have actively cooperated in implementing 
the two (UNSC) resolutions.  Thailand seized the Georgian aircraft 
that carried the North Korean weapons based on a tip from U.S. 
intelligence.  Myanmar also rejected the entrance of Kangnam 1. 
North Korea seeks to disrupt peace by ignoring U.N. resolutions and 
continuing the export of weapons, but decisive action from the 
international community can prevent this. 
 
 
NORTH KOREAN WEAPONS SEIZURE SHOULD NOT AFFECT TALKS 
 
SEOUL 00001946  004 OF 006 
 
 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, December 11, 2009, Page 31) 
 
On Saturday, a cargo aircraft carrying North Korean-made missiles 
and other weapons was detained at a Thai airport and the weapons 
confiscated.  Although the aircraft and its five crew members were 
all from former Soviet Union countries, it appears certain that the 
weapons intended for export were from North Korea since they 
originated from Pyongyang.  The amount of weapons came to a 
considerable 35 tons.  This unfavorable turn of events comes just 
after the visit of Stephen Bosworth, U.S. Special Representative for 
North Korea Policy. 
 
Weapons exports by North Korea are in violation of a United Nations 
(UN) resolution adopted this past spring after the country had 
conducted a nuclear test.  That resolution designates nearly all 
North Korea weapons as subject to an embargo.  While North Korea 
does not recognize this resolution, UN member nations are obligated 
to abide by its content.  As such, there may be a fair amount of 
conflict emerging between North Korea and other concerned nations in 
the future over the determinations made by the UN Sanctions 
Committee. 
 
Another concern is the negative effect this may have on the 
resumption of Six-Party Talks.  North Korea had taken another step 
closer to returning to those talks with Bosworth's visit of Dec. 8 
that lasted until Dec. 10.  Experts are predicting that talks will 
resume after an additional senior-level meeting between North Korea 
and the U.S.  These developments mean that the U.S. and North Korea 
are on the verge of a consensus on the broader framework of the 
denuclearization process.  Furthermore, if talks resume, it is 
expected that negotiations will be proceeding somewhat more 
effectively based on a reflection on past failures.  However, some 
are saying this incident may cause a delay in the resumption of 
talks.  If this incident has a negative effect on international 
opinion, we may see a repeat of the Banco Delta Asia (BDA) incident 
that took place around the time of the September 19 Joint Statement 
in 2005, which prevented the Six-Party Talks from proceeding for 
nearly a year and a half. 
 
Even if the international community moves to deal with the incident 
swiftly in accordance with the spirit of the UN resolution, it needs 
to ensure that there is no increase in needless conflict.  It goes 
without saying that we must not have factions that favor a hard line 
on North Korea using the incident to thwart nuclear negotiations as 
happened with the BDA incident.  Moreover, North Korea, for its 
part, should not engage in misguided stubbornness over facts that 
have already come to light.  It needs to bear in mind that the 
international sanctions targeting it will ultimately go away only if 
headway is made in denuclearization. 
 
If Six-Party Talks are to restart and generate results, it is 
important that all parties involved work to maintain a balance and 
steadily build up trust even if some unforeseen incident takes 
place.  North Korea in particular should view this incident as a 
test case for examining its approach. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
"FOUR-WAY DIALOGUE" IS DESIRABLE FOR PEACE REGIME ON KOREAN 
PENINSULA 
(Hankook Ilbo, December 14, Page 39) 
 
The U.S. and North Korea reportedly agreed to discuss a peace regime 
on the Korean Peninsula in a "four-nation setting" with the ROK and 
China.  Both sides agreed that the four-way talks should be held 
after the Six-Party Talks resume.  This mutual understanding was 
reached during Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth's visit to Pyongyang.  The U.S., which urged the North to 
denuclearize first, and North Korea, which demanded a peace regime, 
agreed to discuss the two issues through separate dialogue.  This is 
desirable progress because the ROKG has considered denuclearization 
and a peace regime the two axes for a peaceful Korean Peninsula. 
 
SEOUL 00001946  005 OF 006 
 
 
 
The need to discuss a peace regime such as replacing the armistice 
agreement with a peace treaty also was brought up in the 1991 Basic 
Agreement and during the Four-Party Talks in Geneva in 1997.  The 
U.S. and North Korea mentioned a four-nation negotiation framework 
for signing a peace treaty in 2000 when special envoy Jo Myong-rok 
visited the U.S.  The September 19, 2005 Joint Statement also 
stipulates that "the directly related parties" will negotiate a 
peace regime (on the Korean Peninsula) at an appropriate separate 
forum. 
 
However, the peace treaty issue has made little progress and was not 
addressed seriously in the Six-Party Talks.  In response to UN 
Security Council's sanctions imposed after its long-range rocket 
launch, North Korea boycotted the Six-Party Talks apparently because 
it aimed to transform denuclearization negotiations into peace 
treaty negotiations.  North Korea called for the removal of the 
U.S.'s threats against North Korea and its nuclear umbrella for the 
ROK as a prerequisite for its denuclearization. 
 
Even though the agreement this time embraced the North's demand, it 
is consistent with the common positions of the U.S. and the ROK. 
The four-way dialogue will take place only after the Six-Party Talks 
resume and the ROK has been reaffirmed as one of the "directly 
related parties."  The U.S. has been pressuring the North to rejoin 
the Six-Party Talks while at the same time proposing an alternate 
road to take.  The 'comprehensive package,' which promises 
normalization of diplomatic ties, a permanent peace regime and 
massive economic assistance in return for the North's complete 
denuclearization, is not different from our government's 'grand 
bargain' proposal.  Thai authorities impounded a Georgian cargo 
plane carrying North Korean weapons including missiles.  This move 
indicates (the U.S.'s) determination to pursue pressure and dialogue 
at the same time. 
 
We should be prudent in preparing for discussions on a peace regime 
because the talks involve other sensitive issues that could affect 
the ROK-U.S. alliance.  However, if such talks help to restart the 
Six-Party Talks and other denuclearization negotiations, we view 
them positively. 
 
 
N. KOREAN WEAPONS SEIZURE REAFFIRMS (THE USG'S) TWO-TRACK PRINCIPLE 
OF SANCTIONS AND DIALOGUE 
(JoongAng Ilbo, December 14, 2009, Page 38) 
 
A cargo plane carrying North Korean weapons was seized in Thailand 
on December 12.  It was only two days after the U.S.-North Korean 
high-level talks ended.  This incident clearly shows the Obama 
Administration's determination to implement a two-track strategy of 
pressure and dialogue toward the North and not to repeat the past 
pattern of the Bush Administration, when sanctions against the North 
disappeared after the communist state entered into dialogue. 
 
As far as it is known, it seems to be certain that North Korea 
violated UN Security Council Resolution 1874.   Thai authorities 
reported that they inspected and seized a Georgian cargo plane from 
Pyongyang carrying 35 tons of North Korean weaponry, including about 
20 missiles and 48 rocket-propelled grenades, when the plane stopped 
for refueling.  The U.S. intelligence authorities reportedly asked 
for cooperation in that process.  Although more details are expected 
to be revealed after the Thai authorities complete their 
investigation, it appears obvious that the North was caught 
exporting weapons through a plane of a third nation. 
 
UNSC Resolution 1874, which was adopted in June after the North 
Korea's second nuclear test, bans all trade in North Korean-made 
weapons.  This Resolution "calls upon all States to inspect all 
cargo to and from the DPRK, in their territory, including seaports 
and airports, if the State concerned has information that provides 
reasonable grounds to believe the cargo contains prohibited items 
(Article 11)," authorizes "all Member States to, and that all Member 
States shall, seize and dispose of prohibited items (article 14)" 
and "requires any Member State to submit promptly reports containing 
 
SEOUL 00001946  006 OF 006 
 
 
relevant details to the Committee on the inspection, seizure and 
disposal (of prohibited cargo) (Article 15)."  Thailand seems to 
have inspected the cargo plane on a tip-off from the U.S. and seized 
the weapons.  In August, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) seized North 
Korean-made weapons on a third nation's vessel bound for Iran, and 
at the end of June, a North Korean ship suspected of carrying 
weapons toward Myanmar returned home after being tracked by a U.S. 
Navy vessel.  It is getting clearer that it is becoming more 
difficult for North Korea to export weapons in defiance of the UNSC 
Resolution. 
 
Although we hope that this incident will not pour cold water on the 
hard-won atmosphere for dialogue between North Korea and the U.S., 
there is one thing that the North should bear in mind: It is just an 
illusion to think that UN sanctions, as in the past, will not be 
effective.   The only way for the North to escape the sanctions is 
to return to the Six-Party Talks and clearly express its intention 
to abandon its nuclear ambitions. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>