^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1964 | 2009-12-18 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 16일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001964

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 16일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/09/12 22:29//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 동아일보, 모든 텔레비전.
＂서민들이 의구심 갖고 있다＂ MB, 營利병원 제동

중앙일보
6개월 끈 합동연구 부처이견 못 좁혀 공동발표까지 취소

한국일보
세종시 수정안 나오면 당론 채택/ 與 "친박 이탈 막는다" 

한겨레 신문, 서울 신문
MB '4대강 고집‘에 꽉막힌 국회

세계일보
대학생 해외연수… 8년새 倍 늘었다

===== 국내 동향 =====

월터 샤프 주한미군사령관은 14일(현지시각) 미국 워싱턴DC에서 열린 미 전략국제문제연구소(CSIS) 주최 토론회에서 전시작전통제권 전환 이후에도 한미 양국 군대는 한반도 유사시에 '단 하나의' 작전계획에 따라 연합군사작전을 펼치기로 했다고 밝혔다. (조선일보)

사프 사령관은 또 "주한미군이 미래에 좀 더 지역적으로 개입하고 전 세계에 배치될 수 있게 할 필요가 있다"며 "한미 양국 간 협의를 통해 미래의 어느 시점에서는 전 세계의 다른 곳에 우리 양국 군대가 함께 배치될 수 있어야 한다"고 했다.

한미 양국은 내년 중으로 한반도 유사시 양국의 군사적 대응 및 협력체계를 총괄적으로 담은 한미 국방지침(Defense Guideline) 제정을 추진 중인 것으로 15일 알려졌다. (중앙, 한국, 세계, 서울)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

미국은 태국이 압류한 북한 무기를 선적한 화물기 사건에 대해 (북한의 무기 수출을 금지한) 유엔 1874호 결의를 위반한 것으로 보고 유엔 안전보장이사회 산하 제재위원회에 이를 회부할 방침도 밝혔다. (조선, 중앙, 한국, 한겨레, 세계)

북한이 20일쯤부터 내년 2월 초까지 외국인의 입국을 통제한다는 방침을 세운 것으로 15일 알려졌다. 북한의 이런 움직임에 대해 전문가들은 김정일 국방위원장의 방중(訪中)을 위한 사전 정지작업이거나 화폐개혁에 따른 내부 혼란을 정리하기 위한 것이라고 분석한다. (조선)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

한국 언론은 태국이 압류한 북한 무기를 선적한 화물기 소식을 계속해서 이어갔다. 대다수 언론은 “다음 단계는 이 사안을 유엔 안보리 대북 제재위원회인 ‘1718 위원회’에 회부하는 것”이라며 “제재위는 조사 결과에 따라 적절한 조치를 할 수 있는 권한을 갖고 있다”고 말한 이언 켈리 미 국무부 대변인의 14일 발언을 전했다.

힐러리 클린턴 국무장관의 14일 발언이 널리 인용되고 있다. "이는 유엔의 대북제재가 작동하고 있음을 보여주는 것이어서 매우 만족스럽다. 태국의 조치는 대북 제재 조치가 작동하고 있으며, 제재를 통해서 무기 확산을 막을 수 있다는 점을 나타내는 것이다."

한편 좌파 성향 한겨레 신문은 “북한이 외화 획득을 위해 무기 수출을 시도하는 건 새삼스러운 게 아니다”라는 힐러리 국무부 장관의 발언을 부각했다. 한겨레는 이는 이번 사안의 심각성을 지나치게 부각시키지 않으려는 의도로 보인다고 해석했다.

스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 평양 방북에 대해 중도 우파 중앙일보는 논설에서 이렇게 말했다. "시간이 걸려도 북한은 6자회담에 복귀할 것이다. 미국은 6자회담 틀 안에서 오바마의 핵없는 세계라는 그랜드 디자인에 맞춰 북한과 대화를 할 것이다. 북핵 해결 없이 핵없는 세계는 없다. …북한이 부드러운 목소리를 내고, 미국이 북한의 그런 변화를 긍정적으로 보는 지금, 한국과 미국 간 대북인식의 간격이 너무 벌어지기 전에 한국도 대북정책을 유연하게 바꿀 때다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[김영희 칼럼] 대북 강경 노선을 풀 때다**(중앙일보, 2009년 12월 16일 39면) 김영희 대기자

정부 고위소식통에 따르면 미국의 대북정책 특별대표 스티븐 보즈워스는 지난주 평양에서 북한 당국자들로부터 듣고 싶은 말을 들었다. 미국은 2005년 9·19 공동성명에 대한 북한의 진의를 알고 싶었다. 북한은 9·19 공동성명이 아직도 유효하다고 보고 그것을 준수할 뜻을 밝혔다. 9·19 공동성명은 북한이 핵무기와 핵무기 개발계획을 포기하겠다고 약속한 유일한 국제적인 합의다. 그것이 유효하고 그것을 지키겠다고 한 북한의 발언에 보즈워스는 크게 고무되었더라고 소식통은 전했다.

북한은 6자회담의 유용성도 인정했다. 그것은 2008년 12월 6차 회의가 북한의 핵신고서에 대한 검증방법을 둘러싼 갈등으로 결렬된 후 긴 휴회 상태에 들어간 6자회담 재개를 예고한 진전으로 환영할 만하다. 북한은 6자회담은 영원히 끝났다고 선언했다. 6자회담의 공동성명에 구애받지 않고 핵국가로 미국과 대등한 핵군축협상을 벌이겠다고 호언장담했다. 이렇게 스스로 사망선고를 내린 6자회담에 복귀할 명분이 아쉬운 북한은 미국에 체면 좀 살려달라고 요구했다. 미국은 보즈워스의 방북이 북한의 6자회담 복귀의 명분일 수 있다는 입장이다.

북한이 언제 6자회담에 복귀할 것인가는 아무도 모른다. 보즈워스 자신은 전략적인 인내심이 필요하다고 말한다. 국제관계에서 전략적이라는 말이 좀 남용되는 인상인데 요컨대 작은 일에 구애받지 않고 북한의 태도변화를 지켜보겠다는 의미다. 미국이 전략적인 인내심을 발휘한다면 30t 분량의 북한제 로켓추진 수류탄, 지대공미사일 발사장치, 개량 미사일 같은 무기류를 실은 화물 전용기가 태국에서 억류된 사건도 북·미 간 긴장완화의 큰 흐름을 크게 바꾸지는 않을 것으로 보인다.

적당한 명분만 주어지면 6자회담에 복귀하겠다는 북한의 입장이 시사하는 바는 크다. 북한은 지난봄 갓 출범한 오바마 정부의 대북정책을 기다리지 않고 두 번째 핵실험과 미사일 발사로 오바마 정부를 압박해 별로 이득을 본 것이 없다는 것을 깨달은 것 같다. 보즈워스에 한 발 앞서 평양을 방문한 미국의 어느 북한전문가는 북한이 국제사회의 제재로 별로 타격을 입지 않은 것 같더라고 말했다. 그러나 북한이 한국과 미국을 상대로 취하는 일련의 화해 제스처는 국제사회와 미국의 대북 제재가 북한에 적지 않은 고통을 주고 있다는 확실한 증거로 보인다. 그중에서도 북한이 지난 8월 빌 클린턴 전 미 대통령의 평양방문을 계기로 미국에 대한 강경노선을 유화노선으로 전환한 것은 가시적인 제재의 효과라고 할 것이다.

2006년 10월의 안보리 제재결의 1718호에는 제재 해제의 조건이 명확히 명시되어 있지 않았다. 그래서 미국 의회에서 민주당을 중심으로 대북 제재, 특히 금융제재가 실패한 정책이었다는 비판이 일어나자 부시 정부는 6자회담 틀 안에서 북·미 양자회담을 시작하고, 제재를 슬그머니 풀고, 급기야는 북한을 테러지원국 명단에서 지우는 과감한 조치까지 취했다. 그러나 지난 6월의 안보리 제재결의 1874호는 북한의 비가역적인 비핵화 조치를 제재 해제의 조건으로 못박았다. 미국이 제재를 풀고 싶어도 6자회담의 다른 참가국들을 포함한 국제사회의 동의 없이 단독행위는 불가능하다. 북한이 그걸 모를 리 없다. 이런 사실은 북한이 이번에 9·19 공동성명의 이행을 약속하고 6자회담에 복귀한다면 북핵 협상 타개의 전망은 과거 어느 때보다 밝다는 것을 의미한다.

이런 결과를 놓고 보면 북한이 지난여름 이후 취하는 거듭된 유화 제스처에 한국이 냉담한 반응을 보인 것이 단기적으로는 효과적인 전략이었다. 한국의 전략은 제재효과가 극대화되는 시점까지 기다리는 것이었다.

이제 미국의 대북 자세의 변화 조짐에 맞추어 한국도 강경입장을 완화할 때다. 더 나가면 효과가 체감될 것이다. 오바마 대통령은 외상으로 노벨 평화상을 받았다. 그는 세계평화를 위해 뭔가를 해서 노벨 평화상 값을 치러야 한다.

시간이 걸려도 북한은 6자회담에 복귀할 것이다. 미국은 6자회담 틀 안에서 오바마의 핵없는 세계라는 그랜드 디자인에 맞춰 북한과 대화를 할 것이다. 북핵 해결 없이 핵없는 세계는 없다. 오바마에게는 내년 봄 미국이 주재할 핵안보 정상회의와 유엔의 핵확산금지조약(NPT) 재검토회의의 성공이 절실하다. 북한이 부드러운 목소리를 내고, 미국이 북한의 그런 변화를 긍정적으로 보는 지금, 한국과 미국 간 대북인식의 간격이 너무 벌어지기 전에 한국도 대북정책을 유연하게 바꿀 때다.

**[사설] 주한미군 해외발진기지 변신 대책 급하다**(중앙일보, 12월 16일, 38면)

미국이 주한미군의 해외발진기지 역할을 실행하기 위한 준비에 본격 나서는 모습이다. 월터 샤프 주한미군 사령관은 14일 “주한미군이 미래에 보다 더 (타 분쟁) 지역에 개입하고 전 세계에 파견될 수 있도록 만들 필요가 있다”고 강조했다. 이에 앞서 버락 오바마 미 대통령이 지난달 오산 미군기지 연설에서 주한미군의 아프가니스탄 파견 가능성을 시사하는 취지로 발언했으며, 10월에는 마이클 멀린 미 합참의장도 유사한 취지의 발언을 했다. 주한미군의 해외파병은 이미 2006년 한·미 간 ‘전략적 유연성’ 개념에 합의함으로써 그 문이 열려 있었다. 다만 지금까지는 파장을 우려한 미 정부가 실제 적용에 신중한 태도를 취해 왔다. 그러나 최근 미 고위 당국자들의 계속되는 발언은 미 정부의 입장이 바뀌었음을 알게 한다. 6·25전쟁 이후 한반도 방위에만 전념해온 주한미군이 머지않아 오키나와 주둔 미군처럼 해외발진기지가 된다는 뜻이다. 우리도 본격적으로 대비해야 할 시점이 된 것이다.

‘전략적 유연성’ 개념이 한·미 간에 합의된 것은 노무현 전 대통령의 ‘자주국방론’과 전시작전통제권 환수 주장이 계기였다. 마침 전 세계 주둔 미군의 효율적 활용 방안에 골몰하던 럼스펠드 미 국방장관이 노 전 대통령의 발언을 빌미 삼아 금기시(禁忌視)되던 주한미군의 해외 파견 가능성을 터놓아야 한다고 강력히 주장해 관철한 것이었다. 과거 한·미 간 갈등이나 주한미군 감축과는 차원이 다른 주장이었다. ‘전략적 유연성’ 도입 이전까지 사실상 한국의 방위는 미국이 책임지는 체제였다. 한미연합사령 부체제에 따라 주한미군사령관이 전시작전통제권을 행사하면서 유사시 한국과 미국의 모든 전투력 자원을 십분 활용하도록 돼 있었기 때문이다. ‘전략적 유연성’과 전시작전통제권 한국군 이양은 미국의 한국 방위 책임을 상당 부분 덜어내고 그 부분을 해외발진기지로 채우는 변화다.

이런 변화가 우리에게 뜻하는 것은 ‘자주국방’의 책임을 우리가 큰 폭으로 더 지게 된다는 것이다. 일각에선 우리의 국력 확대에 따른 당연한 일로 받아들여야 한다는 주장이 있다. 그러나 한반도 안보 상황은 그처럼 한가하지 않다는 데 문제가 있다. 북한의 비핵화와 남북 군사력 감축, 한반도 및 동북아 안보체제의 정착 등이 진전될 때까진 그런 주장이 현실성을 갖기 어려운 것이다. ‘전략적 유연성’은 또 주한미군이 해외발진기지로 변신함으로써 중국·일본·러시아 등 주변국과의 관계, 나아가 우리의 국제적 위상에도 영향을 줄 수 있다. 한·미 관계가 우리의 대외 관계에 영향을 미칠 가능성이 커지는 것이다. 이 문제는 우리의 필요에 따라 일정하게 감수할 수도 있다. 다만 그에 따른 부작용을 최소화하는 준비가 필요하며 이에는 상당한 시간이 필요하다.

우리는 2012년 전시작전통제권 이양 방침을 재검토해야 한다고 주장해 왔다. 이는 한반도 안보 상황과 우리의 주변 여건이 아직 주한미군에 ‘전략적 유연성’을 본격 적용하기에는 무리라는 주장과 동전의 양면을 이룬다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1964.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001964 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 16, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Dong-a Ilbo, All TVs 
"People Have Misgivings;" President Lee Puts the Brakes on Allowing 
Profit-Seeking Hospitals 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Ministries Clash over For-Profit Hospitals 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Ruling Party Seeks to Adopt ROKG's Soon-to-be-Unveiled 
New Sejong City Plan as Party Platform to Prevent Cross-Voting 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun, Seoul Shinmun 
President Lee's "Stubbornness on Four-River Project" 
Paralyzes National Assembly 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Number of College Students on Overseas Language Courses More Than 
Doubled in Eight Years 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
USFK Commander Gen. Walter Sharp, in a Dec. 14 forum organized by 
the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in 
Washington, said that even after the ROK's takeover of wartime 
operational control from the U.S. in 2012, the ROK and the U.S. 
militaries will conduct joint military operations under a "single 
operational plan" in case of an emergency on the Korean Peninsula. 
(Chosun) 
 
He was also quoted as saying: "Sometime in the future we could have 
forces (in Korea) that could, with consultations between both 
nations, be able to be deployed in different places around the 
world." (All) 
 
The ROK and the U.S. are reportedly seeking to establish a Defense 
Guideline in order to cooperate in the event of an emergency on the 
Korean Peninsula. (JoongAng, Hankook, Segye, Seoul) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
The U.S. said on Dec. 14 that it regards Thailand's recent seizure 
of a cargo plane carrying North Korean weapons as (North Korea's) 
violation of UN Resolution 1874 and will report the incident to the 
UN's North Korea Sanctions Committee. (Chosun, JoongAng, Hankook, 
Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul) 
 
It was learned yesterday that North Korea has decided to ban 
foreigners from the country from Dec. 20 until early February. 
Experts viewed this move as designed to prepare for North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il's visit to China or to ease unrest caused by its 
recent currency reform. (Chosun) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
 
The media continues to follow the story of Thailand's recent seizure 
of a cargo plane carrying North Korean weapons.  Most media noted 
Dec. 14 press remarks by State Department Spokesman Ian Kelly, in 
which he said: "The next step here will be to report this incident 
to the UN's North Korea Sanctions Committee, the so-called 1718 
 
SEOUL 00001964  002 OF 004 
 
 
Committee, which has a mandate to investigate and take appropriate 
action in response to incidents like this." 
 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was also widely quoted as saying 
on Dec. 14: "We were very pleased to see the strong action taken by 
the Thais.  It shows that sanctions can work.  It shows that 
sanctions can prevent the proliferation of weapons." 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun, however, in an inside-page article, 
highlighted Secretary Clinton's statement: "I don't think anyone 
should be surprised that North Korea is continuing to attempt to 
evade the sanctions and export around the world, because that is 
their principal source of foreign currency,"   and interpreted this 
as indicating Washington's intention not to bring the seriousness of 
this incident to the spotlight. 
 
With regard to Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth's recent visit to Pyongyang, a commentary in 
right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo observed: "North Korea will return to 
the Six-Party Talks, even if it takes some time.  The U.S. will have 
a dialogue with the North within the Six-Party framework in keeping 
with President Obama's grand design of a nuclear-free world.  A 
nuclear-free world will not come without the resolution of the North 
Korean nuclear issue.  ...   In a situation where the North is 
softening its rhetoric and the U.S. is taking a positive view of 
such change from the North, the ROK should also soften its North 
Korea policy before the gap between the views of the ROK and the 
U.S. regarding the North widens too much." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
IT IS TIME TO SOFTEN HARD-LINE POLICY TOWARD N. KOREA 
(JoongAng Ilbo, December 16, 2009, Page 39) 
By Senior Reporter Kim Young-hie 
 
According to the ROKG's high-ranking source, U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth heard what he 
wanted to hear from North Korean officials in Pyongyang last week. 
The U.S. wanted to know North Korea's true intention about the 
September 19, 2005 Joint Statement.  North Korea, which considers 
the Statement still valid, expressed its intention to abide by it. 
The September 19, 2005 Joint Statement is the only agreement in 
which the North promised to give up its nuclear weapons and 
nuclear-weapons development programs.  The source said that 
Ambassador Bosworth was highly encouraged by North Korea's remarks 
that the Statement is valid and that the North will adhere to it. 
 
North Korea also acknowledged the need for the Six-Party Talks. 
This is welcome progress heralding the resumption of the 
multilateral talks, which were suspended after the sixth round of 
the talks broke down in December, 2008 due to conflicts over how to 
verify North Korea's nuclear declaration.  North Korea declared the 
Six-Party Talks "dead for good."  It boasted that, as a nuclear 
state not bound by the Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks, it 
will have a nuclear arms reduction negotiation with the U.S. on an 
equal footing.  In order to return to the Six-Party Talks that the 
North had declared "dead," however, the communist state needed a 
justification and therefore asked the U.S. to provide a 
"face-saving" way to rejoin the talks.    The U.S.'s position is 
that Ambassador Bosworth's visit to the North could serve as that 
justification. 
 
No one knows when the North will return to the Six-Party Talks. 
Ambassador Bosworth says that time for strategic patience is needed. 
Although the term "strategic" is often abused in international 
relations, in using the term "strategic patience" Ambassador 
Bosworth seems to mean that he will watch for changes in North 
Korea's attitude without being fussy about minor details.  If the 
U.S. exercises strategic patience, even the detention of a cargo 
plane in Thailand loaded with 30 tons of weaponry, including North 
Korean-made rocket-propelled grenades, surface-to-air missile 
launchers and modified missiles, will not likely change the course 
 
SEOUL 00001964  003 OF 004 
 
 
of defusing tension between the North and the U.S. 
 
The North's position that it will rejoin the Six-Party Talks 
whenever it is provided with appropriate justification implies a 
great deal.  Pyongyang seems to have realized that their tactic of 
pressuring the Obama Administration with the second nuclear test and 
missile launches, even before the newly launched administration 
could present its policy on North Korea, was rarely beneficial to 
the communist state.  One U.S. expert on North Korea said after 
visiting Pyongyang before Ambassador Bosworth that it appeared that 
North Korea did not feel the pain of international sanctions. 
However, North Korea's series of conciliatory gestures toward the 
ROK and the U.S. seems to be clear evidence showing that the 
sanctions against the North by the international community and the 
U.S. are hitting the North hard.  It appears, therefore, that North 
Korea started to launch its charm offensive on the U.S. after former 
U.S. President Bill Clinton's visit to Pyongyang this past August. 
 
UN Security Council Resolution 1718, adopted in October, 2006, does 
not specify the conditions for lifting the sanctions.  Therefore, 
when the Democratic Party members of the U.S. Congress started to 
criticize the Bush Administration by saying that the sanctions, 
especially the financial sanctions, against the North was a failure, 
the administration resumed its bilateral talks with the North within 
the Six-Party framework, lifted the sanctions, and even took North 
Korea off the U.S. list of terrorism-supporting countries.  However, 
UNSC Resolution 1874, issued this June, clearly states that the 
lifting of sanctions is conditioned on North Korea's irreversible 
steps toward denuclearization.  Even if the U.S. wants to lift 
sanctions, it would be impossible without the consent of the 
international community, including other Six-Party nations.  North 
Korea must have been well aware of this.  This means that if the 
North implements its obligations under the September 19 Joint 
Statement and returns to the Six-Party Talks, the prospects for the 
resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue will be brighter than 
ever before. 
 
Judging from these results, it was effective in the short term for 
the ROK to have reacted coolly to the string of conciliatory 
gestures that the North has taken since this summer.  The ROK's 
strategy was to wait until the effect of the sanctions is maximized. 
 Now is the time for the ROK to also soften its hard-line stance in 
line with signs of change in the U.S. attitude toward North Korea. 
If the ROK continues in taking a hard-line stance against the North, 
it will be less effective.  President Obama won the Nobel Peace 
Prize "on credit."  He should pay for the prize by doing something 
for world peace. 
 
North Korea will return to the Six-Party Talks, even if it takes 
some time.  The U.S. will have a dialogue with the North within the 
Six-Party framework in keeping with President Obama's grand design 
of a nuclear-free world.  A nuclear-free world will not come without 
the resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue.  For President 
Obama, success at the U.S.-organized Nuclear Security Summit 
scheduled for next spring and the 2010 Nuclear Non-proliferation 
Treaty Review Conference is desperately needed.  In a situation 
where the North is softening its rhetoric and the U.S. is taking a 
positive view of such change from the North, the ROK should also 
soften its North Korea policy before the gap between the views of 
the ROK and the U.S. regarding the North widens too much. 
 
 
MEASURES NEEDED TO BRACE FOR USFK'S TRANSFORMATION INTO RAPID 
DEPLOYMENT TROOPS 
(JoonAng Ilbo, December 16, Page 38) 
 
The U.S. is preparing to transform U.S. forces in the ROK into rapid 
deployment troops that could be dispatched to other parts of the 
world (where the U.S. faces conflict.)  On December 14, USFK 
Commander Gen. Walter Sharp stressed the need for the USFK to be 
more regionally engaged and globally deployed.  Previously, in an 
address to US troops at Osan Air Base last month, President Barack 
Obama also hinted at the possibility of sending U.S. forces in the 
ROK to Afghanistan.  In October, Adm. Michael Mullen, Chairman of 
 
SEOUL 00001964  004 OF 004 
 
 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff made similar remarks.  An agreement on 
"strategic flexibility" was reached between the ROK and the U.S. in 
2006, paving the way for the USFK to be dispatched overseas.  So 
far, the USG has been cautious in adopting that policy.  But recent 
remarks by U.S. high-ranking officials show a change in the USG's 
position.  The USFK, which has been devoted to defending the Korean 
Peninsula since the Korean War, will soon serve as rapid deployment 
troops like U.S. soldiers stationed in Okinawa. 
 
Former President Roh Moo-hyun championed self-defense and demanded 
that the ROK take over wartime operational control from the U.S. 
Following his remarks, former U.S. Defense Secretary Rumsfeld, who 
was considering ways to effectively utilize U.S. forces stationed in 
foreign countries, strongly argued that the U.S. and the ROK should 
leave open the possibility for the US Forces Korea (USFK) to be 
dispatched overseas.  This led both countries to strike an agreement 
on "strategic flexibility."  Before strategic flexibility was 
introduced, the U.S. bore the responsibility to defend the ROK. 
Under the ROK-US Combined Forces Command, the USFK Commander would 
exercise wartime operation control and fully utilize combat 
resources of the ROK and the U.S. in case of an emergency. 
(However,) strategic flexibility and transfer of wartime operational 
control to the ROK will allow the U.S. to alleviate its burden to 
defend the ROK and to transform the USFK into rapid deployment 
troops. 
 
This change means that the ROK should take a broader responsibility 
to defend itself.  Some observers say that this should be taken for 
granted due to an expansion of our national power.  However, the ROK 
still faces security concerns.  Such an argument will become 
realistic only after North Korea denuclearizes, the ROK and North 
Korea disarm and security takes hold on the Korean Peninsula and in 
East Asia.  If the USFK turns into rapid deployment troops under the 
concept of strategic flexibility, this will affect the ROK's 
relations with neighboring countries such as China, Japan, and 
Russia.  We may have to accept changes that accompany the 
implementation of this new approach.  We also should brace ourselves 
to minimize any ill effects (from the USFK becoming rapid deployment 
troops). 
 
We have argued that the ROK and the U.S. should review the ROK's 
takeover of wartime operational control from the U.S. in 2012.  This 
position is in keeping with the argument that it is too early to 
apply strategic flexibility to the USFK given the Korean Peninsula's 
security conditions. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>