^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1933 | 2009-12-11 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 9일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001933

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 9일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/08/02 00:21//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
청와대 ＂군납비리 끊어야＂… 국방부·방위사업청 재편 나서

중앙일보
한나라 '노조 전임자 무임금' 후퇴

동아일보
서울대 인사 - 예산 - 조직 ‘홀로서기’ 2011년 3월 법인으로 새출발 한다

한국일보
北 '타미플루 내민 손' 밀칠까 잡을까 

한겨레 신문, 세계일보, 서울신문
한나라, 국토위서 4대강 예산 일방처리 /민주 “본회의 날치기 예고편”

===== 국내 동향 =====

한국 정부는 8일 파르완 지역 민간 요원의 보호를 위해 320명 내외의 군 병력을 내년 7월부터 2012년 12월까지 파병하기로 최종적으로 확정하였다. 한국 정부는 이번 주 중 파견 동의안을 국회에 제출할 예정이다. (전체)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 8일 평양에 도착해 북미 대화를 위한 3일간의 일정에 돌입했다. 그는 북한의 6자회담 복귀를 설득할 예정이다. (전체)

미 고위 정부 당국자는 7일 언론 브리핑을 통해 북한이 6자회담 복귀 의사를 분명히 밝히지 않을 경우 결의 1874호의 강도 높은 집행과 그 밖의 안보리의 대북 결의의 강도를 높인다는 국제 사회의 의지를 강화할 예정이라고 말했다. (조선, 중앙, 서울)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 보즈워스의 방북 ====

모든 한국 언론은 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 8일 평양에 도착했다는 소식을 전하며 그가 오바마 정부 아래에서 처음으로 고위급 북미 양자 회담에 나서는 첫 미국 특사라고 설명하였다. 보즈워스 특사는 강석주 외무성 제1부상 등을 만나 북한의 6자회담 복귀를 설득하고 9·19 공동성명의 실천 약속을 재천명할 것으로 예상한다.

보수 조선일보는 "김정일 국방위원장과의 면담 가능성은 높지 않아 보인다"는 정부 관계자의 발언을 전했다.

대다수 언론은 7일 미 행정부 고위 당국자가 [[http://www.state.gov/p/eap/rls/rm/2009/12/133271.htm|미·북 대화 관련 브리핑]]에서 "이번 대화의 목표는 북한의 6자회담 복귀와 2005년 9.19 공동성명에 대한 진정한 의지를 확인하는 것이고 …이 두 문제와 관련해 단순히 북한이 무슨 생각을 하는 것인지 알아보는 기회로 삼을 것이다"라고 언급했으며 더 나아가 보즈워스 대표가 "별도의 유인책을 갖고 가지는 않는다. …단지 앞서 실천하기로 한 공약 이행을 위해 6자회담에 돌아왔다고 해서 보상을 하지는 않는다는 방침"이라고 밝혔다고 전했다.

조선일보는 이를 두고 북한이 6자회담 복귀의 전제 조건으로 요구하고 있는 정전협정을 대체할 '평화협정 논의'는 없다는 식의 발언으로 해석하였다. 보수 동아일보는 해당 발언을 두고 미국 정부의 대북 강경 기조를 재확인한 것으로 판단했다.

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/12/08/2009120801664.html|[사설] 아프간 파병, 안전 대책 확보를 최우선으로 해야]]**(조선일보, 2009년 12월 9일, 39면)

정부는 8일 아프가니스탄 파르완주(州)에 지방재건팀(PRT) 100여명과 경찰 40여명, 군 350여명 등 총 500여명을 파견하는 아프가니스탄 지원 방안을 확정, 국회에 파병동의안을 냈다. 이번에 파견되는 PRT는 행정·보건·의료 지원, 농업·농촌 개발, 직업·경찰 훈련 등을 맡게 된다.

정부는 우리 군은 2010년 7월 1일부터 2012년 12월 31일까지 현지에 주둔해 PRT 인원을 보호하는 역할을 담당할 것이라고 밝혔다. 파르완주는 원래 탈레반 세력이 강하지 않았고, 인근에 미 공군 바그람기지가 있어 유사시 지원도 용이해 아프간 34개 주(州) 중 비교적 안전한 지역으로 꼽힌다. 그러나 서울의 10배 가까운 면적의 파르완주는 70% 이상이 산악 지형이고, 최근에도 로켓·박격포·사제폭탄 공격이 계속된 곳이다.

정부는 파병 부대의 대부분을 특전사로 구성하고, 기지 바깥으로 이동할 때 필요한 장갑차량과 기관총이 탑재된 UH-60 블랙호크 헬기 등을 가져가 일단 자체적으로 안전 문제를 해결키로 했다. 현지 사정이 미국 등 다른 나라 파견군의 지원을 기대하기 쉽지 않기 때문이다.

이번 파병의 최대 관심사는 우리 PRT 인력과 군의 안전을 어떻게 확보하느냐다. 따라서 정부는 아랍권 국가들에 한국은 아프간 재건을 돕기 위해 현지에 가는 것이고, 군은 재건 지원 인력의 안전 확보를 위해 함께 가는 것임을 충분히 설명하는 사전 외교 노력도 함께 기울여야 한다.

국회 역시 파병동의안 심의 과정에서 우리 군의 안전 대책이 확고한지 철저하게 살펴봐야 한다. 민주당은 정부가 그간 1년 단위로 재연장해 오던 파병 시기를 2년 반으로 길게 잡은 것 등을 문제 삼아 파병동의안 처리에 부정적 입장을 보이고 있다. 그러나 파병 기간을 1년으로 잡은 독일이 매년 의회의 파병 기간 연장 심의 철이 돌아올 때마다 현지에서 독일군에 대한 협박과 공격이 증가해 곤욕을 치르고 있다.

민주당이 여당이던 2001~2002년 해·공군 수송지원단, 동의부대와 다산부대를 아프간에 파병했다. 당시에도 파병 반대론이 만만치 않았지만, 테러와의 전쟁이란 국제적 명분과 한·미 동맹관계 등을 고려해 파병을 결정했다. 민주당은 이번 파병동의안 심의에서 무조건 반대보다는 과거의 여당 경험을 살려 파병 부대와 지원팀의 안전 문제와 미국·아랍권과의 관계에서 국익(國益)을 최대한 보호하는 방안이 무엇인지를 국민에게 보여줘야 할 것이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://travel.donga.com/NEWS/3/all/20091209/24672090/2|[사설]아프간 평화 기여, 국익과 국격 위한 투자다]]**(동아일보, 12월 9일, 35면)

아프가니스탄에 약 350명의 국군을 파견하는 정부의 파병동의안이 어제 확정됐다. 국회가 동의하면 우리는 140여 명의 지방재건팀(PRT)과 국군을 아프간에 보내 평화 정착과 재건을 위한 국제사회의 활동에 동참하게 된다. 이라크 자이툰부대, 레바논 동명부대, 소말리아 청해부대 등으로 이어진 한국의 국제평화 기여활동에 새로운 장이 추가되는 것으로 국익과 국격을 위한 투자다. 

아프간 전쟁은 버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 미군 3만 명 추가 파병 결정으로 새로운 국면에 접어들었다.

국제사회는 8년째 지속되고 있는 테러세력 비호집단 탈레반과의 전쟁에서 승리하기 위해 결집하고 있다. 북대서양조약기구(NATO)도 병력 7000명 증파를 약속했다.

우리도 아프간의 평화와 재건을 위해 자발적으로 나서야 할 상황이다. 한국은 세계 13위의 경제력을 가진 경제협력개발기구(OECD) 회원국이자 주요 20개국(G20) 멤버로서 내년 G20 정상회의를 개최한다. 우리가 세계의 지도적 국가 반열에 들었다고 자부하면서 정작 국제평화를 위해 아무런 기여를 하지 않는다면 지도국으로 대접을 받기 어렵다.

정부는 현지 실사를 거쳐 아프간 지원 및 파병 계획을 수립했다. 우리 재건팀은 아프간의 행정능력 강화, 보건의료 지원, 농업 및 농촌개발, 교육 및 직업 훈련, 경찰 훈련을 담당할 예정이다. 알카에다와 탈레반을 축출하고 아프간을 홀로 서게 하기 위해 반드시 필요한 지원이다. 재건팀이 주둔할 파르완 주는 상대적으로 안전한 지역이라지만 최악의 경우에 대비하려면 충분한 병력을 보내 민간인을 보호할 필요가 있다. 우리는 2007년 아프간 인질사태를 겪었다. 탈레반이 파병을 계기로 우리 민간인을 상대로 테러를 기도할 가능성도 배제할 수 없다.

당론으로 반대의사를 밝힌 민주당을 비롯한 야당은 당리당략이 아니라 국익과 국제적 책임 차원에서 파병동의안을 다뤄야 한다. 민주당의 전신인 열린우리당은 5년 전 자이툰부대 파병을 지지했다. 아프간에는 43개국이 전투병과 재건팀을 파견해 이라크전쟁 때보다 지원국가가 많다. 한국이 뒷짐을 지고 있을 형편이 아니다. 미국과의 공조를 통해 북한의 위협에 대비해야 하는 처지에 미국이 주도적으로 참여하는 테러방지와 평화유지활동에 소극적이다 보면 정작 더 큰 것을 잃을 수 있다.

===== 특집 =====
**"평양밑 300m에 지하세계 김정일 중(中) 도주용 땅굴도"**(조선일보, 2009년 12월 9일, 4면)

안용현 기자

황장엽(86·) 전 북한 노동당 비서는 7일 탈북자들이 운영하는 자유북한방송에 출연해 "평양 지면 아래 약 300m 지점에 지하철도(지하철)와 다른 제2의 지하 세계가 존재한다"고 말한 것으로 8일 알려졌다.

이 '비밀 땅굴'은 유사시 김정일 국방위원장 등 북한 수뇌부를 위한 대피로이며 남포·순천 등 평양 주변 40~50㎞까지 뻗어 있다고 황 전 비서는 밝혔다.

그는 방송에서 "지하철도 공사를 책임지던 경비대장이 찾아와 병사들과 대학생들(황 전 비서는 김일성대 총장을 지냈음) 간의 폭행사건 처리를 부탁하며 공사 현장에 초대했다"며 "지하철도로 내려간 뒤 그 깊이만큼 더 내려간 곳에 땅굴이 있었다"고 했다. 이런 비밀 땅굴과 지하시설은 "평양 곳곳에 부지기수"라는 말도 했다.

황 전 비서에 따르면 평양에서 직선 거리로 약 40㎞에 위치한 순천의 자모산까지 뚫린 땅굴에는 깨끗한 샘물과 새파란 풀이 있었고, 직선 거리로 약 50㎞인 묘향산 인근의 영원까지도 땅굴이 연결됐다는 것이다.

특히 "평양 삼석구역 철봉산 휴양소에서 남포항까지 땅굴을 뚫어 놨는데 이곳을 통해 유사시 (김정일 등이) 중국으로 도주할 수 있다"고 했다.

그는 "북한은 6·25전쟁 휴전 직후부터 땅굴 건설에 집중 매진했으며 이들 땅굴은 한때 방북한 소련 군사대표단이 감탄했을 정도로 정밀함을 자랑하고 있다"고 전했다.

평양에는 1973년 개통된 깊이 100~150m의 지하철이 있으며, 평시에는 외부 여행자들에게'관광 명소'로 소개되지만 전시(戰時)에는 거대한 지하 벙커 기능을 할 것으로 알려졌다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)
**
청와대 ＂군납비리 끊어야＂… 국방부·방위사업청 재편 나서**(조선일보, 2009년 12월 9일 1면)

주용중 기자

청와대가 국방부와 방위사업청의 기능 재편과 구조조정을 골자로 하는 무기 획득체계 개편안을 마련 중인 것으로 8일 전해졌다.

청와대 관계자는 이날 "개편안은 내년 초 발표될 예정"이라며 "예산 편성에서 무기 조달 집행에 이르는 전(全) 과정에서 군과 군 출신 인사들의 오래된 독점체제를 해소하고 감사 기능을 강화하는 방안이 핵심이 될 것"이라고 했다.

국방부는 그동안 방위사업청에 넘어간 무기 관련 예산 편성권과 중장기 계획 편성권, 국방과학연구소(ADD)에 대한 감독권 등을 되찾으려 노력해왔으나 방사청이 반발하면서 극심한 알력을 빚어왔다.

방위사업청은 노무현 정부 때인 2006년 1월 국방개혁과 비리 방지 등을 명분으로 국방부와 분리돼 출범했다. 청와대 관계자는 그러나 "이명박 정부 들어서도 각종 군납 비리가 끊이지 않았다"면서 "이 대통령이 여러 기관으로부터 이런 실태와 함께 무기 관련 예산 절감 방안에 대해 보고받은 것으로 안다"고 했다.

이 대통령은 이날 국무회의에서 "무기구입과 조달, 병무관련 업무 등은 현재의 구조에서는 근원적으로 비리가 생길 틈이 있다"면서 "획기적인 개선책이 마련돼야 한다. 예산을 절감하면서 효과를 높일 수 있는 방안이 있다고 본다"고 했다. 그는 또 "이제는 제도적 차원에서 업무 전반을 검토해야 한다. 국방부 단독으로는 어려울 것이다. 관련 부처와 관계기관이 협조해야 종합적 대책이 나올 수 있을 것"이라고 말했다.

청와대 관계자는 "그동안 청와대 내에 무기획득체계 개편을 위한 TF팀이 가동돼 왔다"면서 "올해 단행된 국세청 개혁과 비슷한 수준의 강도 높은 개혁 방안을 마련 중"이라고 했다.

(이 기사는 조선일보가 준비한 번역이다. 우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 일부 수정을 가했다.)

[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e_northkorea/392323.html|한겨레 기사 생략]]((NORTH KOREA'S FREE TRADE BASE PLANS FOR RYUCHO ISLAND SIGNAL REFORM [Hankyoreh Shinmun, December 9, 2009, Pages 1 and 6: Excerpts]))

**미국 北 다루는 美 대화법은 외강내유?**(한국일보, 2009년 12월 9일 3면)

황유석 워싱턴 특파원

겉으론 "김정일 면담 없다"면서 평양일정 연장 배제 안해

북미대화를 보는 미 행정부의 입장은 표면적으로는 단호하다. 강조한대로 '6자회담 복귀'와 '9ㆍ19 공동성명에 따른 비핵화 이행'을 촉구하기 위한 것이 북미대화의 '전부'라는 것이다.

미 행정부는 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 방북 직전 당국자들을 통해 이런 입장을 거듭 분명히 했다. 이언 켈리 국무부 대변인은 "김정일(북한 국방위원장)과의 면담을 추진하고 있다고 생각하지 않는다"고 말했다. 자칫 이번 대화가 '협상'이라는 의심을 부를 수도 있는 김 위원장과의 만남이 '필요조건'은 아니며, 더욱이 미국이 먼저 요청할 필요성은 느끼지 않는다는 얘기다. 조지 W 부시 정부에서 국가안보회의(NSC) 아시아 담당 국장을 지냈던 빅터 차 조지타운대 교수는 북한의 바람과는 달리 "버락 오바마 대통령이 북미대화를 일단 한차례만 승인한 것 같다"고 밝혔다.

미국의 목적은 비핵화 및 6자회담 복귀에 대한 북한의 분명한 응답을 듣는 것이다. 여기엔 북한 설득에 실패했을 때 가장 큰 대북 지렛대를 갖고 있는 중국에 강력한 대북 제재에 나서도록 요구할 수 있는 명분을 축적하려는 의도도 있다. 행정부 당국자는 "설득 실패시 기존 유엔결의 외에 추가조치가 필요할 지 협의하겠다"며 대화시작 전에 제재를 언급하기도 했다. 일본 마이니치 신문이 8일 "북한이 지난달 방북한 미국 민간의 한반도 전문가들에게 6자회담 복귀 언급 없이 평화협정 체결 요구만 거론했다"고 보도한 것도 미국의 운신 폭을 좁히는 요인이다.

그러나 단호함의 이면에는 '결과'를 바라는 기대감도 묻어 나온다. 이는 당국자들이 보즈워스 대표의 평양 일정에 대해 "마감시한을 정하고 싶지 않다"며 2박3일 일정이 연장될 가능성을 배제하지 않은 데서도 드러난다. 북한 반응에 따라 미국의 대응이 유연해질 수 있음을 시사한 것이다. 여기에는 오바마 행정부 출범 이후 첫 고위 북미접촉이라는 '상징성'과 제재만으로는 북한을 변화시킬 수 없다는 '현실론'이 깔려 있다.

워싱턴의 대북 전문가들은 북이 주장하는 평화협정과 북미 관계정상화는 "미국의 입장에서는 앞뒤가 바뀐 것"이라면서도 미국의 '포괄적 접근법'과 관련해선 논의 여지가 남아 있다고 보고 있다. 미국이 적대관계인 쿠바에 이익대표부를 둔 것과 같은 '중간단계'의 신뢰회복 조치가 거론될 수도 있다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전제를 금지합니다.
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1933.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 9, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Blue House to Overhaul Military's Weapons 
Procurement System to Ensure Transparency 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Ruling Grand National Party (GNP) Backtracks 
on Banning Wage Payment to Full-Time Unionists 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Cabinet Approves Bill to Allow Seoul National University to Become 
Independent Corporate Entity in March 2011 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
President Lee Offers to Provide Flu Vaccines to N. Korea amid 
Reports of Rapid Spread of New Flu Virus in the North 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
Ruling GNP Railroads Budget for Four-River Restoration Project 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
The ROKG yesterday finalized a plan to send up to 350 soldiers to 
Afghanistan to protect civilian workers in Parwan Province from July 
1, 2010 to Dec. 31, 2012. The plan, pending approval at the National 
Assembly, will be submitted for review this week. (All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------- 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
arrived in Pyongyang yesterday, beginning his three-day trip for 
bilateral talks with North Korea to persuade the North to return to 
the Six-Party Talks. (All) 
 
A senior U.S. administration official, in a Dec. 7 press briefing, 
said that if North Korea does not return to the Six-Party Talks, it 
will reinforce the intention of the international community to 
continue a very strong enforcement of Resolution 1874 and other 
Security Council resolutions against North Korea. (Chosun, JoongAng, 
Seoul) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
--------------- 
 
-Ambassador Bosworth's Visit to N. Korea 
---------------------------------------- 
All ROK media covered U.S. Special Representative for North Korea 
Policy Stephen Bosworth's arrival in Pyongyang yesterday, portraying 
him as the first U.S. envoy to sit down for senior-level bilateral 
talks with North Korea under the Obama Administration.  According to 
media reports, while in Pyongyang for three days, Ambassador 
Bosworth is expected to meet with First Vice Foreign Minister Kang 
Sok-ju to persuade the North to return to the Six-Party Talks and to 
reaffirm its commitment to the September 19 Joint Statement. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo quoted an ROKG official as saying: "Chances 
seem slim for Ambassador Bosworth to meet North Korean leader Kim 
Jong-il." 
 
Most media noted Dec. 7 press remarks by a senior U.S. 
administration official, in which he said: "The purpose of these 
talks is to determine whether they're willing to reaffirm the 2005 
joint statement and return to the (Six-Party) Talks.  This is ... 
simply to have an opportunity to determine what the North's 
intentions are with respect to those two issues."  He was further 
 
SEOUL 00001933  002 OF 007 
 
 
quoted: "(Ambassador Bosworth) is definitely not carrying any 
additional inducements. ... We don't intend to reward North Korea 
simply for going back to doing something that it had previously 
committed to do. " 
 
Chosun Ilbo interpreted these remarks as implying that there will be 
no discussion of a peace treaty replacing the armistice on the 
Korean Peninsula, which the North has demanded as a precondition to 
returning to the Six-Party Talks.  Conservative Dong-a Ilbo saw the 
remarks as reaffirming Washington's firm stance toward North Korea. 
 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
SAFETY OF TROOPS IN AFGHANISTAN MUST BE TOP PRIORITY 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 9, 2009, Page 39) 
 
The government finalized its Afghan troop deployment plan on 
Tuesday, deciding to dispatch around 100 civilian reconstruction 
workers, 40 police officers and around 350 soldiers to Parwan 
Province north of Kabul.  The personnel will be in charge of 
administrative and medical support, agricultural and rural 
development and vocational and police training. 
 
The troops will be deployed in Afghanistan from July 1, 2010 until 
Dec. 31, 2012 and their main mission will be protecting the Korean 
civilian aid workers and trainers.  Parwan Province is not a Taliban 
stronghold and is considered relatively safe among the 34 provinces, 
while its proximity to a U.S. Air Force Base in Bagram makes it easy 
to fly in supplies should emergencies arise.  Parwan Province is 10 
times the size of Seoul, and 70 percent of its terrain is covered by 
rugged mountains.  Recently, there have been attacks by rockets, 
mortars and improvised explosive devices. 
 
Most of the soldiers being deployed there will be picked from the 
special forces units, and armored personnel carriers and UH-60 Black 
Hawk transport helicopters mounted with machine guns will also be 
sent to protect the Korean personnel because support from American 
and other multinational forces would not be readily available. 
 
The greatest concern is the safety of the personnel.  The government 
must take preemptive diplomatic steps to explain to its Arab allies 
that the mission of the contingent is to assist in reconstruction 
efforts, and that the troops are being sent to protect the Korean 
civilian aid workers. 
 
As it reviews the deployment plan, the National Assembly must make 
sure that all measures have been taken by the military to ensure the 
safety of personnel.  The main opposition Democratic Party is 
against the plan and is taking issue with the two-and-a-half-year 
deployment schedule, which differs from the previous 
administration's approach of renewing the mission every year. 
Germany, which has set its troop deployment schedule at one year 
renewable, is experiencing a massive headache every time its 
parliament has to ratify an extension, while troops face increased 
pressure and attacks in Afghanistan when that time comes. 
 
The Roh Moo-hyun Administration deployed the Dongui (medical) and 
Dasan (engineering) units, as well as Air Force transport personnel, 
to Afghanistan between 2001 and 2002, when the DP was the ruling 
party.  The Roh Administration faced considerable opposition to the 
troop dispatch but decided it needed to send them in view of the 
international fight against terrorism and the importance of the 
Korea-U.S. alliance.  Rather than flatly rejecting the new troop 
deployment plan, the DP must tap into its experience as the former 
ruling party and suggest constructive ways to ensure the safety of 
the Korean civilian workers and soldiers and protect the national 
interest. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
SEOUL 00001933  003 OF 007 
 
 
 
ROK CONTRIBUTION TO AFGHANISTAN SERVES NATIONAL INTEREST 
(Dong-a Ilbo, December 9, Page 35) 
 
The ROKG yesterday finalized a plan to send up to 350 soldiers to 
Afghanistan.  If the National Assembly approves the plan, the ROK 
will join in international peace-building and reconstruction efforts 
by sending 140 Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) personnel and 
(350) troops to protect them to Afghanistan.  This will add a new 
chapter to the ROK's international peace-building efforts.  The ROK 
had deployed the Zaytun Unit in Iraq, the Dongmyeong Unit in Lebanon 
and the Cheonghae Unit in Somalia.  The ROK's contributions serve 
national interest and enhance national status as well. 
 
The Afghan war has entered into a new phase after President Obama 
announced a plan to send an additional 30,000 troops to Afghanistan. 
 The international community is rallying to win an eight-year war 
against the Taliban which has sheltered terrorist organizations. 
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) also pledged to deploy 
an additional 7,000 troops. 
 
We should be voluntarily involved in the peace-building and 
reconstruction process of the war-torn country.  The ROK is the 
world's 13th largest economic power.  We are a member of the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and 
will host next year's G20 summit.  If the ROK just touts itself as 
one of the world's leading countries without making any 
contributions to international peace, it will not be genuinely 
treated as such. 
 
After a field survey, the ROKG established a plan to provide aid and 
send troops to Afghanistan.  The ROK's Provincial Reconstruction 
Team (PRT) will take charge of strengthening Afghanistan's 
administrative ability, assisting its health care and agricultural 
development, providing vocational training, and training the Afghan 
police.  This assistance is surely necessary to root out al-Qaida 
and the Taliban and to help Afghanistan stand on its own feet. 
Although Parwan Province, where the PRT will be stationed, is said 
to be a relatively safe region, we need to prepare for the worst 
possible situation by sending troops to protect civilians there. 
In 2007, we saw ROK aid workers kidnapped in Afghanistan.  We cannot 
rule out the possibility that with the ROK's troop contribution, the 
Taliban may attempt a terrorist attack on ROK civilians. 
 
The opposition parties, including the Democratic Party, which 
expressed their opposition to the troop dispatch, should address the 
troop dispatch bill from the perspective of our national interests 
and international responsibility.  The Uri Party, the predecessor of 
the Democratic Party, supported the deployment of the Zaytun Unit to 
Iraq five years ago.  A total of 43 nations, more than the number of 
nations contributing to the war in Iraq, have sent their combat 
troops and reconstruction teams to Afghanistan.  The ROK is not in a 
position to sit idly by.  In a situation where we have to brace for 
the North Korean threat in cooperation with the U.S., if we are 
passive in U.S.-led anti-terrorism efforts and peacekeeping 
activities, we could lose something more precious. 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
KIM JONG-IL 'HAS S-E-C-R-E-T UNDERGROUND ESCAPE ROUTE' 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 9, 2009, Page 4) 
 
By Reporter Ahn Yong-hyun 
 
Kim Jong-il has a network of s-e-c-r-e-t tunnels as an escape route 
in case of emergency, according to a prominent defector.  Hwang 
Jang-Yop (86), a former secretary of the North Korean Workers Party, 
on Sunday told the Seoul-based Free North Korea Radio run by a group 
of defectors, "About 300 m below ground in Pyongyang, there exists a 
second underground world which is different from the subway level." 
 
The tunnels stretch for some 40 to 50 km around Pyongyang linking to 
Nampo and Sunchon, Hwang said. 
 
SEOUL 00001933  004 OF 007 
 
 
 
"The chief security guard for the subway construction site came and 
invited me to the site, asking me to mediate in a scuffle between 
soldiers and college students," Hwang said.  "After I went down into 
the subway, I found another tunnel further down below."  He said 
there are countless such s-e-c-r-e-t tunnels and underground 
facilities in Pyongyang.  Hwang is a former president of Kim Il Sung 
University. 
 
He said there are clean spring water and green grass in one tunnel 
that leads to Mt. Jamo in Sunchon, about 40 km from Pyongyang. 
Another tunnel extends to Yongwon near Mt. Myohyang, about 50 km 
from Pyongyang. 
 
Yet another links the Mt. Cholbong recreation center in Samsok 
District in Pyongyang to the port of Nampo, which would allow 
leaders to escape to China in an emergency, he said. 
 
"North Korea started building the tunnels right after the armistice" 
that halted the Korean War, Hwang said.  "They were so elaborately 
built that a visiting Soviet military delegation marveled at them." 
 
Pyongyang also has a straightforward subway 100-150 m-deep that 
opened in 1973.  It is touted to foreign visitors as a tourist 
attraction but could be converted into a huge underground bunker in 
time of war. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
CHEONG WA DAE AIMS TO END GRAFT IN DEFENSE PROCUREMENT 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 9, 2009, Front page) 
 
By Reporters Ju Yong-joong 
 
Cheong Wa Dae is working out reforms to defense procurement to end 
frequent irregularities, an official said Tuesday.  Under the plan, 
the roles of the Defense Ministry and the Defense Acquisition 
Program Administration (DAPA) will be reorganized. 
 
A Cheong Wa Dae official said the plan, to be announced early next 
year, will focus on ending the long-standing monopoly of active-duty 
and retired military officers in the defense procurement process, 
which ranges from budget formulation to weapons procurement.  It 
will also focus on increasing transparency. 
 
DAPA has resisted the ministry's efforts to regain the authority to 
formulate the defense procurement budget, work out mid- and 
long-term defense programs, and supervise the Agency for Defense 
Development. 
 
DAPA was launched as a spin-off agency of the ministry in January 
2006 during the Roh Moo-hyun Administration as part of defense 
reforms and to prevent corruption.  But the official said 
irregularities in defense procurement have continued even after the 
inauguration of the Lee Myung-bak Administration. 
 
In a Cabinet meeting, President Lee Myung-bak said, "There is a risk 
of systematic corruption under the current system of weapons 
procurement and conscription administration" and called for a 
"drastic" reform plan. "I believe there is a way to save money and 
improve results" at the same time, he added.  He added that the 
Defense Ministry should work together with related agencies to come 
up with a comprehensive measure. 
 
The official said a taskforce is working out "strong" ways of 
revamping the defense procurement system.  The official added that 
the Defense Acquisition Program Administration will be revamped at 
the same level as the National Tax Service restructuring which the 
government carried out this year. 
 
(This is a translation prepared by the newspaper.  We have compared 
the English version on the website with the Korean version and made 
 
SEOUL 00001933  005 OF 007 
 
 
some changes to make them identical.) 
 
 
NORTH KOREA'S FREE TRADE BASE PLANS FOR RYUCHO ISLAND SIGNAL REFORM 
 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, December 9, 2009, Pages 1 and 6: Excerpts) 
 
By Correspondents Park Min-hee and Kwon Tae-ho 
 
Experts say North Korea is looking to strengthen international 
economic ties and attract foreign investment 
 
North Korea is reportedly planning the creation of a free trade base 
on Ryucho Island near Sinuiju and its development as a new special 
economic district.  Analysts are interpreting this as a signal from 
the country that it plans to renew efforts at building a special 
economic district in Sinuiju, the largest gateway city on its border 
with China. 
 
In an interview with Hankyoreh on Tuesday, a source in Dandong, who 
wished to remain unnamed and has long worked with North Korea and is 
familiar with the North Korean situation, reported hearing recently 
from senior officials in charge of North Korea's external trade that 
preparations are underway for the development of Ryucho Island as 
part of a special economic zone.  The source said, "As a result of 
Ryucho Island's small area (2.82 square kilometers), it looks as if 
they are planning to build a free trade base rather than a 
large-scale complex and to display wares coming out of North Korea 
there so that people can buy them freely."  The source added, "They 
also plan to build a large dock, and there is the added advantage of 
China's Langtou Harbor across the way." 
 
It is also reported that core parties in the North Korean government 
have decided on the plan and responsible parties within the North 
Korean government who had been appointed have already begun 
attracting foreign capital.  Observers are predicting that if these 
reforms are successful, there is a strong chance that economic 
development will expand to the Sinuiju area. 
 
Observers have also learned that the North Korean government will be 
establishing even more measures in order to create a greater ripple 
effect to further open up Raseon, a city in North Hamgyong Province, 
for investment in conjunction with the Chinese government's 
development of the Chang-Ji-Tu (Changchun, Jilin and Tuman River 
basin) Pilot Zone. 
 
These trends are a sign that North Korea has begun a drive for 
economic development through openness and the attraction of foreign 
investment.  Observers are saying this determination towards 
development appears to have been present in North Korea for some 
time.  Sources in Dandong say that Chinese factory equipment and 
construction materials such as H-beams have been taken into North 
Korea through Dandong at an unprecedented scale since early last 
year, lending support to claims that North Korea has already set a 
blueprint for its economic development.  Analysts are also saying 
this move from North Korea could have a favorable effect on the 
North Korea-U.S. dialogue currently in progress. 
 
Chinese officials familiar with the North Korea situation say that 
North Korea's recent currency reform should be interpreted as a sign 
of the active pursuit of a "North Korean-style market economy" 
rather than a rollback of economic reforms in the country.  Another 
source acquainted with trends among senior North Korean officials 
said that North Korea has been "very active recently about joining 
forces with China to develop the border region, and the central 
government is preparing specific plans." 
 
The source added, "It is clear that economic reforms will move 
forward after this currency reform." 
 
It is also known that North Korea recently created a Foreign 
Investment Board and has been making active attempts to attract 
foreign investment.  Scott Snyder, director of the Center for 
U.S.-Korea Policy at the Asia Foundation, visited North Korea in 
 
SEOUL 00001933  006 OF 007 
 
 
late November as a member of a U.S. Council on Foreign Relations 
Task Force on Korean Peninsula policy and announced what he heard 
from North Korean authorities during his visit in a post Monday 
(local time) on the web site GlobalSecurity.org. 
 
The head of North Korea's Foreign Investment Board who met with 
Snyder's group actively informed them about plans to attract foreign 
investment,. These plans include a variety of strategies ranging 
from (dealing with) the issue of repatriation of profits earned by 
foreign investment companies in North Korea to various tax benefits. 
 North Korea also offered to set monthly wages at around 30 Euros 
(44.60 dollars).  Snyder noted that this is lower than the monthly 
wage of 57.50 dollars currently paid to North Korean workers at the 
Kaesong Industrial Complex. 
 
North Korean authorities also have plans to attract foreign 
investment to assist in building 100,000 housing units in Pyongyang, 
one of the tasks set in the country's plan for a "strong and 
powerful nation by 2012."  Additionally, the country has proposed a 
plan to offer "special perks" related to the mining of North Korean 
natural resources to foreign companies interested in investing in 
the project. 
 
Foreign companies are currently forbidden from engaging in new 
investment in North Korea as part of the sanctions set by United 
Nations Resolution 1874 in response to North Korea's nuclear test on 
May 25 of this year.  Observers say North Korea's plan for 
attracting foreign investment can also be interpreted as a 
determination to reestablish relations with the international 
community in the future. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
U.S. APPROACH TO NORTH KOREA REFLECTS HARD SURFACE WITH FLEXIBLE 
CORE 
(Hankook Ilbo, December 9, 2009, Page 3) 
 
By Washington Correspondent Hwang Yu-seok 
 
The U.S. publicly says that there will be no meeting with Kim but 
does not rule out the possibility of extending Ambassador Bosworth's 
schedule in Pyongyang. 
 
The U.S. administration's position on its dialogue with North Korea 
appears resolute on the surface.  The administration has emphasized 
that the U.S.-North Korea dialogue is only aimed at urging the North 
to rejoin the Six-Party Talks and implement denuclearization steps 
under the September 19 Joint Statement. 
 
Right before U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Stephen 
Bosworth's visit to Pyongyang, Washington reiterated this position 
through its officials.  State Department Spokesman Ian Kelly said, 
"I don't think he's seeking a meeting with (North Korean leader) Kim 
Jong-il."  In other words, a meeting with Kim, which could raise 
doubts that this dialogue may be a "negotiation," is not a necessary 
condition (for Bosworth's visit), and the U.S. does not feel a need 
to request a meeting with Kim, either.  Victor Cha, a professor at 
Georgetown University who served as Director for Asian Affairs at 
the National Security Council under the George W. Bush 
Administration, said that against North Korea's wishes, "President 
Barack Obama seems to have approved only one round of dialogue with 
the North." 
 
The U.S. aims to get Pyongyang's clear response about 
denuclearization and a return to the Six-Party Talks.  (Ambassador 
Bosworth's visit) is also intended to build justification for asking 
China, which has enormous leverage over North Korea, to apply strong 
sanctions against the North, in case (Washington) fails to persuade 
the North (to rejoin the multilateral talks.)  Ahead of (Ambassador 
Bosworth's) bilateral talks with the North, a USG official made 
remarks on sanctions, saying that if the U.S. fails to persuade the 
North (to return to the Six-Party Talks,) it will consult (with the 
 
SEOUL 00001933  007 OF 007 
 
 
international community) on the need to impose additional sanctions 
against North Korea in addition to existing UN Resolutions. 
According to a December 8 report by Japan's Mainichi Shimbun, North 
Korea told U.S. experts on the Korean Peninsula who visited 
Pyongyang last month that it wants to sign a peace treaty (with the 
U.S.) while not mentioning the possibility of returning to the 
Six-Party Talks.  This report may leave less room to maneuver for 
the U.S. 
 
However, it seems that the U.S. expects good results (from the 
bilateral talks) despite its determined stance.  This is evident 
when U.S. authorities did not rule out the possibility that 
Ambassador Bosworth's three-day stay may be extended, saying that 
the U.S. does not want to put a time line on his visit.  This 
indicates that the U.S. could act in a flexible manner depending on 
how the North will respond.  This U.S. position results from a 
symbolic meaning of Bosworth's visit as the first high-level 
U.S.-North Korea talks since the inauguration of the Obama 
Administration and a realistic judgment that sanctions alone cannot 
change North Korea. 
 
U.S. experts on North Korea say that by demanding a peace treaty and 
the normalization of bilateral ties, North Korea is putting the cart 
before the horse.  The U.S. experts, however, believe that these 
issues may be discussed from the perspective of a "comprehensive 
approach."  The U.S. also may raise the need to take an 
"intermediary" step in order to restore mutual trust, much like it 
established the U.S. Interests Section in Cuba even though the U.S. 
remains hostile to (the government in) Cuba. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>