^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1832 | 2009-11-18 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 18일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001832

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84201|서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 18일]]
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/05/10 04:49//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 동아일보, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
"온실가스 30% 감축"

중앙일보
미중, 이견 감추고 협력 외쳤다

한국일보
미중 "북, 6자 조속 복귀" 촉구

한겨레 신문
국가정책까지 토목공사하듯 '빨리빨리'/MB, 절차생략 속도전

===== 국내 동향 =====

오바마 대통령이 내일 예정된 이명박 대통령과의 정상회담을 위해 오늘 서울에 도착할 예정이다. 양국 정상은 여러 현안 중에서도 북핵 문제와 한미 FTA 문제를 논의할 예정이다. (전체)

한국 정부는 아프가니스탄 북부 파르완주(州)에 독립적인 지방재건팀(PRT)을 설치하고 이를 보호하기 위한 병력을 파견하는 방안을 적극 검토 중이라고 유명환 외교통상부 장관은 17일 정례 브리핑에서 밝혔다. (전체)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

오바마 대통령과 후진타오 중국 주석은 17일 기후 변화에서 북한에 이르는 국제 이슈와 관련해 협력하기로 합의했다. (전체)

오바마 대통령은 후진타오 중국 국가주석과 함께한 공동기자회견 자리에서 이렇게 밝혔다. “후 주석과 6자회담 조속 재개에 합의했다. 북한은 대항과 도발의 길, 국제사회의 일원이 되는 두 길 사이에 서 있다. 국제사회의 일원이 된다면 훨씬 좋은 생활을 누릴 수 있을 것이다. (전체)

일본 정부가 일본인 납치문제 해결을 위해 12월 중 하토야마 유키오(鳩山由紀夫) 총리의 방북을 추진 중이라고 주간 아사히(朝日)가 17일 발매된 최신호에서 보도했다. ([[http://www.bigkinds.or.kr/search/totalSearchNewsView.do?news_id=01101101.20091117100001454|한국]])

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 오바마 대통령의 아시아 순방 ====

모든 한국 언론은 오바마 대통령과 후진타오 중국 국가주석이 17일 베이징에서 함께한 정상회담 소식을 다루면서 양국 정상이 막혀있던 6자회담을 지속하기로 합의했다고 보도했다. 대다수 언론 보도는 중국 주석과 함께한 오바마 대통령의 공동기자회견 발언을 부각하였다: "후 주석과 6자회담 조속 재개에 합의했다."

한국 언론은 또 인권, 교역, 기후 변화 등 핵심 쟁점에서 의견이 갈렸다고 전했다.

신문사들은 다음과 같은 제목의 기사를 실었다: <G2 美·中 정상회담 들여다봤더니;양국 손은 잡았지만… 구체적 합의는 없었다> (보수 조선일보); <[뉴스분석] 미·중, 이견 감추고 협력 외쳤다; 북핵 오바마 “북 도발 땐 고립” 발언하자, 후진타오 ＂대화로 해결”>(중도 우파 중앙일보); 오바마 위안화 절상 은근히 채근… 후진타오 묵묵부답(보수 동아일보); <미·중 정상회담/ "안보·경제 협력" 큰틀 하모니…무역 등 세부쟁점 '엇박자'> (중도 한국일보)

보수 동아일보 사설: "오바마는 가까운 장래에 세계 제1의 경제대국으로 부상할 중국과 전략적 차원의 협력관계 구축을 위한 노력을 본격적으로 시작했다. 이번 미중 정상회담도 그 일환이다. …내일 한미정상회담에서 양국 정상은 북한을 회담장으로 끌어낼 구체안을 만들어 중국을 포함한 6자회담 참가국에 제시해야 한다. 한국을 처음 방문하는 오바마에게 북핵이 이란 핵보다 더욱 시급한 현안임을 인식시킬 필요도 있다. 미국의 중국 중시정책으로 한미동맹 강화가 더욱 절실해졌다."

좌파 성향 한겨레 신문이 작성한 사설 내용: "그러나 이번 정상회담은…미흡한 부분도 없지 않다. 두 정상은 다음달 코펜하겐 회의에서 즉각 효력을 갖는 협약을 도출하기 위해 노력한다고 했지만, 내용에서는 기존 입장을 되풀이했다. 또 후 주석은 거시정책에서 협력을 강조하면서도 관심의 초점이 돼온 위안화 평가절상 문제는 거론하지 않았다. 물론 쉽지 않은 사안이지만, 중국의 국제적 영향력을 고려한다면 좀더 책임있는 자세가 필요했다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://nk.chosun.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=121139|[사설] 미·중 兩强 시대 대한민국의 진로(조선일보, 2009년 11월 18일, 39면)]]**

17일 중국 베이징 인민대회당에서 열린 오바마 미국 대통령과 후진타오 중국 주석의 미·중 정상회담은 앞으로 세계 질서를 이끌게 될 미·중 G2(주요 2개국) 시대의 개막을 알리는 자리였다. 오바마 대통령은 3박4일 중국 방문 동안 "중국은 미국과 함께 시급한 세계적 도전에 대응할 강력한 동반자"라는 입장을 밝혔다. 오바마는 "강력한 중국, 번영하는 중국은 국제사회 힘의 원천이 될 수 있으며, 미국은 중국을 봉쇄하지 않을 것"이라는 신(新)아시아 구상도 내놓았다.

오바마 대통령은 중국으로부터 분리 독립하려는 달라이 라마와 티베트 문제에 대해서도 "티베트는 중국의 일부분"이라며 사실상 중국 정부의 손을 들어줬다. 과거 미국 대통령들이 중국을 방문할 때마다 단골 이슈로 거론하던 중국의 인권정책에 대한 비판도 사라졌다. 미국과 중국 모두 논란을 부를 큰 쟁점들을 피해갔기 때문이다. 오바마는 "중국은 지난해 발생한 최악의 금융위기에서 미국이 벗어날 수 있도록 도와줬다"고도 했다.

미국은 지난해 9월부터 1년 동안 1조4000억달러의 재정 적자를 기록했고, 누적 적자가 미국 GDP의 80%에 육박한다. 미국 국채(國債)를 외국에 계속 매각해 나라 살림을 꾸려가야 하는 처지다. 중국은 8000억달러의 미국 국채를 보유한 최대 채권국이다. 미국이 더이상 중국에 대해 이래라저래라 요구하기 힘든 상황이다.

미·중 양국 정상이 G2 시대 개막을 세계에 알린 이날 기자회견에서 가장 먼저 밝힌 회담 합의사항은 북한 핵문제였다. 오바마 대통령은 "후 주석과 6자회담의 조속한 재개에 합의했다"고 했고, 후 주석도 "대화와 협상을 통해 한반도 핵문제를 해결하는 것이 중국과 미국은 물론 유관 당사국들의 공동 이익에 부합한다는 것에 인식을 같이했다"고 밝혔다.

북한 핵 등 한반도 문제는 앞으로도 미·중 회담의 단골 이슈가 될 것이다. 미국과 중국 모두 한반도에 깊은 이해관계를 갖고 있어 한반도야말로 미·중 G2 시대의 한복판에 서게 됐다고 할 수 있다. 미국은 지난 7월 중국측에 북한 급변사태에 대비한 전략대화를 제의하기도 했다. 북핵과 남북통일 등 한반도의 운명이 걸린 문제들이 미·중 협의의 테이블 위에서 다뤄질 것이라는 이야기다. 그리고 G2 시대의 국제 현실을 감안하면 미국과 중국이 내놓는 한반도 구상과 해법은 세계를 움직일 가능성이 높다.

그러나 미국과 중국이 필요에 따라 때로는 공동으로, 때로는 각각 추구하는 한반도 문제 해법이 반드시 대한민국의 국익과 구상에 일치할 것이라는 보장은 없다. 미·중 G2 시대를 맞아 대한민국 외교와 국가 전략은 그 이전과 질적으로 달라져야 한다. 지금까지의 단선적 차원을 뛰어넘는 복합적 국가전략 수립을 서두를 때다. 

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 미·중, 세계 현안에 좀더 적극적인 대응을**(한겨레신문, 2009년 11월 18일, 31면)

중국을 방문중인 버락 오바마 미국 대통령과 후진타오 중국 국가주석은 어제 정상회담을 열고 거시경제 분야에서부터 우주개발에 이르기까지 폭넓은 분야에서 협력하기로 합의했다. 두 정상은 양국관계의 건전한 발전이 단순히 두 나라를 넘어 세계의 평화와 안전을 위해 중요하다는 데 인식을 같이하고, 세계적 경제위기의 해결과 기후변화회의 성공, 핵확산 저지 등을 위해서 함께 노력하기로 했다.

세계 최강국인 미국과, 미국에 이어 ‘G2’로 떠오르고 있는 중국이 세계가 직면한 여러 문제 해결을 위해 협력을 확대하기로 한 것은 의미있는 진전이다. 특히 이번 정상회담에서 눈에 띄는 부분은 핵 관련 분야다. 두 정상은 북한과 이란 핵문제 해결을 위해 보조를 맞추기로 했다. 그동안 이란 핵문제와 관련해 미온적 태도를 보였던 중국의 후 주석은 “중국은 국제사회가 핵 비확산 체제를 지켜야 한다는 점을 강조한다”며 “이란 핵문제도 대화와 타협을 통해 해결해야 할 것”이라고 말하는 데까지 나아갔다. 이란 핵문제 해결을 위한 일보진전이라 할 만하다.

북한 핵문제와 관련해 두 정상의 입장은 한층 가까워졌다. 두 정상은 공동성명에 6자회담의 조속한 재개를 촉구하는 내용을 포함시켰고, 공동기자회견에서도 거듭 북한 핵문제의 평화적 해결을 강조했다. 후 주석은 “대화와 협상을 통해 한반도 핵문제를 해결하는 것이 중국과 미국 양국은 물론 유관 당사국들의 공동이익에 부합한다는 것에 인식을 같이했다”고 말했다. 이제 두 나라 정상의 이런 의지에 북한이 답해야 할 차례다. 아울러 북한은 물론 우리나라도 그동안의 대결적 자세를 접고 새롭게 열린 대화의 장에 적극 참여해 핵 없는 한반도를 향한 도정에 나서야 한다.

그러나 이번 정상회담은 지구촌에서 두 나라가 갖는 비중에 비추어 미흡한 부분도 없지 않다. 현안인 코펜하겐 유엔기후변화협약 회의와 중국 위안화 절상 문제가 그것이다. 두 정상은 다음달 코펜하겐 회의에서 즉각 효력을 갖는 협약을 도출하기 위해 노력한다고 했지만, 내용에서는 기존 입장을 되풀이했다. 또 후 주석은 거시정책에서 협력을 강조하면서도 관심의 초점이 돼온 위안화 평가절상 문제는 거론하지 않았다. 물론 쉽지 않은 사안이지만, 중국의 국제적 영향력을 고려한다면 좀더 책임있는 자세가 필요했다. 

**[사설]美-中밀월시대, 韓美동맹 강화 더 절실해졌다**(동아일보, 11월 18일, 35면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 일본 중국을 거쳐 오늘 서울에 온다. 오바마 대통령은 첫 아시아 순방을 한미 미중 미일 양자(兩者)관계를 새로 정립하고 미국의 전반적인 대(對)아시아 정책을 천명하는 기회로 활용하고 있다. 오바마는 ‘미국의 첫 태평양 대통령’이라고 자임하면서 아시아 국가들과 정치 경제 군사적 협력을 강화하겠다고 다짐했다. 일방주의 외교에서 벗어나 상호 협력을 강조하며 손을 내미는 오바마의 아시아 중시정책은 우리의 외교환경에도 변화를 몰고 올 것이다. 무엇보다 미국과 중국의 ‘특별한 관계’가 초래할 국제질서 변화에 대한 능동적 대응이 절실하다.

올해는 미중 수교 30주년이다. 오바마는 전통적 우방인 한국 일본보다 중국 방문에 공을 더 들였다. 한일 방문일정은 각각 1박 2일이지만 중국 체류는 3박 4일이다. 그는 ‘미중 G2 시대’의 본격적인 개막을 앞두고 조율작업에 특별히 정성을 쏟았다. 정상회담 결과도 좋았던 것 같다. 오바마는 어제 기자회견에서 기후변화, 핵확산, 경제회복과 같은 도전을 극복하기 위한 중국과의 협력 필요성을 강조했다. 후진타오 중국 국가주석도 “양국이 국제사회의 도전에 동반자로서 대응해 나가기로 했다”고 화답했다.

오바마는 미중 협력을 양국 관계 발전뿐 아니라 국제적 현안을 해결하기 위한 동력으로 삼으려는 구상을 갖고 있다. 미국은 이미 7월 워싱턴에서 열린 제1차 미중 전략경제대화에서 양국의 협력을 통한 국제현안 해결 전략을 드러냈다. 오바마는 가까운 장래에 세계 제1의 경제대국으로 부상할 중국과 전략적 차원의 협력관계 구축을 위한 노력을 본격적으로 시작했다. 이번 미중 정상회담도 그 일환이다.

미중 정상이 북핵문제를 국제적인 비(非)확산 문제 차원에서 다룬 점을 주목하지 않을 수 없다. 두 정상은 북한과 이란 핵 문제를 거의 비슷한 비중으로 다뤘다. 후진타오는 “한반도 비핵화와 6자회담 프로세스를 추진해야 한다”면서 이란 핵과 마찬가지로 북핵도 “대화와 협상을 통해 해결해야 한다”고 강조했다. 그러나 대화와 협상으로 북한을 다루는 데는 한계가 있음을 중국도 잘 알 것이다. 

내일 한미정상회담에서 양국 정상은 북한을 회담장으로 끌어낼 구체안을 만들어 중국을 포함한 6자회담 참가국에 제시해야 한다. 한국을 처음 방문하는 오바마에게 북핵이 이란 핵보다 더욱 시급한 현안임을 인식시킬 필요도 있다. 미국의 중국 중시정책으로 한미동맹 강화가 더욱 절실해졌다.

===== 특집 =====

**‘오바마 효과’ 누그러진 反美**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 18일, 3면)

윤완준 기자

버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 방한에 대한 진보진영의 대응은 과거 다른 미국 대통령들의 방한 때보다 한결 부드러운 분위기다. 참여연대, 한국진보연대 등 진보진영 60여 시민단체가 주축이 된 ‘아프가니스탄 재파병 반대 시민사회 연석회의’는 18일 서울 도심에서 ‘아프가니스탄 점령 중단과 한국군 재파병에 반대하는 반전평화 촛불 문화제’를 열겠다고 밝혔다. 

하지만 참여연대 관계자는 “한국에 아프가니스탄 파병 압력을 넣지 말라고 미국에 요구하는 자리가 될 것”이라며 “방한 자체를 반대하는 집회는 아니다”라고 설명했다. 따라서 오바마 대통령 방한 기간에 진보진영이 ‘반(反)오바마’를 외칠 가능성은 낮다. 지난해 8월 조지 W 부시 대통령 방한 당시 극렬한 반대 시위가 벌어졌던 것과는 사뭇 다른 분위기다.

…전문가들은 이런 변화가 오바마 행정부의 출범이 한국인들의 대미 호감도를 크게 높였기 때문이라고 분석한다. 지난해 봄 미국산 쇠고기 수입 반대 시위 때 극에 달했던 반미 정서는 많이 누그러진 분위기다. 미국의 여론조사 기관인 퓨리서치센터가 7월 발표한 한국 등 25개 나라 국민의 대미 호감도 조사 결과에 따르면 한국인(18세 이상 성인남녀 702명)의 78%가 미국을 호의적으로 생각한다고 답했다. 한국인의 대미 호감도는 오바마 대통령 아버지의 출신국인 케냐와 나이지리아에 이어 세 번째로 높았다. 퓨리서치센터의 2000년 조사 때 한국인의 대미 호감도가 58%, 2002년 52%, 2003년 46%였던 것과 비교하면 대미 인식이 크게 좋아졌음을 알 수 있다.

미국을 긍정적으로 보는 한국인이 늘어난 까닭은 두 가지로 볼 수 있다. 우선 오바마 대통령의 당선 그 자체다. 소수자인 흑인을 대통령으로 당선시키는 미국 민주주의의 힘을 한국인들이 새삼 존중하기 시작했다는 것이다. 

이는 또 대화와 협력을 강조하는 오바마 대통령의 스마트 외교에 대한 국제사회의 지지가 투영된 결과이기도 하다. 일방주의 외교를 펼친 부시 행정부에 대한 반감이 높았을 때는 2002년 미군 장갑차에 의한 여중생 사망사건처럼 촉발점이 생길 때마다 극단적인 반미감정이 불타올랐다. 그러나 현재는 진보진영도 오바마 대통령 당선의 의미와 오바마 대통령 외교정책의 합리성을 부정하기 어려운 상황이다.

구갑우 북한대학원대 교수는 “오바마 행정부의 정책에 진보진영이 기대감을 높이면서 미국의 정책이 합리적이라면 미국을 싫어할 이유가 없다는 쪽으로 인식이 변화하고 있다”고 말했다.

반면 현재는 반미감정이 폭발할 이슈가 없고 명분과 논리상 공격할 근거가 부족하기 때문에 잠잠할 뿐 오바마 대통령의 등장이 한국 사회 일각에 뿌리내린 반미 정서를 불식한 것은 결코 아니라는 견해도 있다. 반미를 존재의 핵심 근거로 삼고 있는 민족해방(NL)계열의 운동권 세력은 오바마 정부 출범으로 선명한 공격 목표를 잃어버린 딜레마를 겪고 있을 뿐이라는 설명이다. 전상인 서울대 교수는 “미국에 대한 인상이 긍정적으로 변했다고 미국을 한국 현대사에서 가해자로 인식하는 반미 정서가 사라진 것은 아니다”라며 “엘리트 중심의 한미 교류에서 벗어나 공공 외교를 통해 한미 간 보통 국민들 사이에 우호적 분위기가 확산돼야 한다”고 말했다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1832.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001832 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 18, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Dong-a Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
ROK to Cut Greenhouse Gas Emissions 30 Percent by 2020 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
U.S., China Hide Differences and Voice Cooperation 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
U.S., China Urge N. Korea to Promptly Return 
to Six-Party Talks 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Lee Myung-bak Administration's Race to Implement Policy Causes 
Confusion and Conflict 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
President Barack Obama will arrive in Seoul today for a summit 
meeting tomorrow with President Lee Myung-bak. The two leaders are 
expected to discuss the North Korean nuclear issue and the KORUS 
FTA, among other things. (All) 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan, in a Nov. 17 regular briefing, said 
that the ROKG is considering setting up an independent military base 
in the Afghan province of Parwan, north of the capital Kabul, when 
it sends troops there to protect ROK civilian aid workers. (All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
----------------- 
 
President Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao agreed on Nov. 17 to 
cooperate on a host of global issues from climate change to North 
Korea. (All) 
 
President Obama said during a joint press conference with his 
Chinese counterpart: "We agreed on resuming the Six-Party Talks 
process as soon as possible. North Korea has a choice between 
further isolation and provocation or becoming a full part of the 
international community, which can give a better life to its 
people." (All) 
 
According to a Japanese weekly magazine, Japanese Prime Minister 
Yukio Hatoyama is seeking to visit North Korea next month to resolve 
the issue of Japanese citizens abducted by North Korean agents. 
(Hankook) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-President Obama's Asia Trip 
---------------------------- 
All ROK media covered yesterday's summit meeting in Beijing between 
President Barack Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao, reporting 
that the two leaders agreed to continue with the stalled Six-Party 
Talks and urged North Korea to promptly return to the multilateral 
talks.  Most coverage highlighted President Obama's statement during 
a joint press conference with his Chinese counterpart: "We agreed on 
resuming the Six-Party Talks process as soon as possible." 
 
The media also observed that the two leaders remained divided over 
key issues, including human rights, trade, and climate change. 
 
Newspapers carried the following headlines: "Obama, Hu Jintao: Same 
Bed, Different Dreams ... They Show Differences on Every Major 
Issue" (conservative Chosun Ilbo); "U.S., China Hide Differences and 
Voice Cooperation; Obama Mentions N. Korea's Isolation In Case of 
 
SEOUL 00001832  002 OF 005 
 
 
Provocation, While Hu Jintao Stresses Resolution Through Dialogue" 
(right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo); "Obama Indirectly Presses for 
Yuan's Appreciation... Hu Jintao Remains Silent" (conservative 
Dong-a Ilbo); and "U.S., China in General Harmony on Security and 
Economic Issues... but Out of Sync on Sensitive Issues, including 
Currency Exchange Rates" (moderate Hankook Ilbo) 
 
 Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized: "President Obama has 
launched earnest efforts to establish a strategic cooperative 
relationship with China, a nation which will emerge as the world's 
largest economy in the near future.  This U.S.-China summit is part 
of these efforts. ...  At tomorrow's summit, the leaders of the ROK 
and the U.S. should come up with specific measures to bring North 
Korea back to the negotiating table and present them to Six-Party 
nations, including China.  We need to make President Obama, who will 
visit Seoul for the first time, aware that the North Korean nuclear 
issue is more urgent than the Iranian issue.  With Washington's 
China-focused policy, the strengthening of the ROK-U.S. alliance has 
become more desperately needed." 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun wrote in an editorial: "This 
(U.S.-China) summit leaves something to be desired.  ... The two 
leaders agreed to work toward an accord at next month's UN-backed 
climate change talks in Copenhagen which will have immediate 
operational effect, but reiterated their previous positions in terms 
of details.  Furthermore, Chinese President Hu Jintao, while 
stressing cooperation on macroeconomic policies, made no mention of 
the yuan peg to a weakening dollar, an issue which has been the 
focus of great attention." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
KOREA MUST BE READY FOR THE NEW WORLD ORDER 
(Chosun Ilbo, November 18, 2009, Page 39) 
 
The meeting between U.S. President Barack Obama and Chinese 
President Hu Jin-tao in Beijing was an opportunity to signal the 
beginning a new world order led by China and the U.S.  During his 
four-day visit, Obama stressed that Beijing was a "powerful partner" 
in U.S. efforts to deal with global challenges.  "A strong and 
prosperous China can be the source of strength for the international 
community and the United States will not seal China off," he said. 
 
Even on the issue of Tibetan independence, Obama practically sided 
with China by saying, "We recognize that Tibet is part of the 
People's Republic of China."  Gone are criticisms of Beijing's human 
rights abuses which previous U.S. presidents made during their 
visits to China.  The U.S. and China both avoided any 
unpleasantness.  "China's partnership has helped the United States 
pull out of the worst recession in a generation," Obama said. 
 
The U.S. recorded a $1.4 trillion deficit over the last year 
starting in September of 2008, while the accumulated fiscal deficit 
amounts to 80 percent of its GDP.  The U.S. government must continue 
issuing Treasury Bills in order to run the country.  China is 
America's largest creditor owning $800 billion worth of U.S. 
Treasury notes.  The U.S. is no longer in a position to tell China 
what to do. 
 
The North Korean nuclear standoff was the first issue where 
agreement was announced at the post-summit press conference.  "We 
agreed on the importance of resuming the Six-Party Talks as soon as 
possible," Obama said.  "Both of us remain committed to resolving 
the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula through dialogue and 
consultation," Hu said.  "Such a commitment serves the common 
interests of China and the United States and all other parties 
concerned." 
 
Matters concerning the Korean Peninsula will become staple items on 
the agenda of future U.S.-China talks.  Both countries have deep 
interests on the peninsula.  In July, the U.S. government even 
proposed strategic talks with China to deal with sudden and 
 
SEOUL 00001832  003 OF 005 
 
 
unexpected changes happening in North Korea.  The North Korean 
nuclear problem, Korean reunification and other issues will be 
discussed between Washington and Beijing and that will to a large 
extent determine how the international community acts. 
 
There is no guarantee that the solutions offered either 
independently or jointly by the U.S. and China will always be in 
line with South Korea's interests and plans.  As a new era dawns, 
Seoul's diplomatic strategies must change.  It is time to go beyond 
the single-track approach and come up with a multi-layered plan. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
U.S., CHINA SHOULD EXERT MORE PROACTIVE EFFORTS ON GLOBAL ISSUES 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, November 18, 2009, Page 31) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao had a 
summit in Beijing yesterday and agreed to cooperate on a broad range 
of issues from macroeconomic matters to space development.  Based on 
the shared view that a healthy improvement in bilateral relations is 
important not only for the two nations but also for world peace and 
safety, the two leaders decided to work together to resolve the 
global economic crisis, achieve success at the UN climate change 
conference, and deter nuclear proliferation. 
 
It is meaningful that the U.S., as the world's superpower, and 
China, which is emerging as one of the G2 nations with the U.S., 
have agreed to expand their cooperation on global pending issues. 
Especially noteworthy at the U.S.-China summit were discussions 
about the nuclear issue.  The two leaders decided to fall into step 
with each other over the resolution of the North Korean and Iranian 
nuclear issues.   Instead of taking a lukewarm attitude to the 
Iranian nuclear issue as he has always done, Chinese President Hu 
said this time that it is very important for the international 
community to uphold the international nuclear non-proliferation 
regime and properly resolve the Iran nuclear issue through dialogue 
and negotiation.  It seems that China made significant headway in 
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 
The two presidents also took similar positions on the North Korean 
nuclear issue.  In a joint statement, both leaders called for an 
early resumption of the Six-Party Talks, repeatedly emphasizing the 
need to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue peacefully. 
President Hu said, "Both of us remain committed to resolving the 
nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula through dialogue and 
consultation," adding, "Such a commitment serves the common 
interests of China and the U.S. and all other parties concerned." 
Now, it is the North's turn to respond to the two leaders' 
commitment.  Moreover, not only North Korea but also the ROK should 
shy away from a confrontational posture and actively engage in 
dialogue in order to achieve a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula. 
 
This (U.S.-China) summit leaves something to be desired given the 
international status of the two countries.  They made little 
progress on pending issues such as the UN Climate Change Conference 
in Copenhagen and the yuan's appreciation.  The two leaders agreed 
to work toward an accord at next month's UN-backed climate change 
talks in Copenhagen which will have immediate operational effect, 
but reiterated their previous positions in terms of details. 
Furthermore, Chinese President Hu Jintao, while stressing 
cooperation on macroeconomic policies, made no mention of the yuan 
peg to a weakening dollar, an issue which has been the focus of 
great attention.   Even though they are tricky issues, China should 
have shown a more responsible attitude since it has great influence 
on the world. 
 
 
U.S.-CHINA HONEYMOON PERIOD; ROK-U.S. ALLIANCE SHOULD BE FURTHER 
STRENGTHENED 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 18, page 35) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama arrives in Seoul today following his 
 
SEOUL 00001832  004 OF 005 
 
 
trip to Japan and China.  President Obama is using his first tour of 
Asia as an opportunity to reshape the ROK-U.S., U.S.-China, and 
U.S.-Japan relations and proclaim the U.S.' Asia policy.  Obama 
billed himself as "America's first Pacific president," vowing to 
strengthen political, economic and military cooperation with Asian 
countries.  He emphasizes mutual cooperation (with Asia), steering 
away from unilateral diplomacy and is extending his hand to Asia. 
This Asia-centered policy may spark a change to the ROK's diplomatic 
approach.  Most of all, we desperately need to respond actively to a 
change in the international order, which will likely be triggered by 
a "special relationship" between the U.S. and China. 
 
The U.S. and China mark 30 years of diplomatic ties this year.  It 
appears that President Obama put more emphasis on his visit to China 
than his trip to the ROK and Japan, which are the U.S.'s traditional 
allies.  Obama stayed in China for three days, longer than his 
two-day itineraries in the ROK and Japan.  With the full-blown G2 
era looming ahead, he particularly concentrated on making 
coordination with China.  It seems that the U.S.-China summit also 
yielded good results.  During yesterday's press conference, 
President Obama stressed the need to cooperate with China to tackle 
challenges such as climate change, nuclear nonproliferation and 
economic recovery.  Chinese President Hu Jintao said in response 
that both countries agreed to address global challenges as a 
partner. 
 
President Obama intends to use U.S.-China cooperation as a driving 
force to develop bilateral relations and resolve global issues.  At 
the first U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue in Washington in 
July, the U.S. already unveiled its strategies to resolve global 
pending issues through cooperation with Beijing.  President Obama 
has launched earnest efforts to establish a strategic cooperative 
partnership with China, a nation which will emerge as the world's 
largest economy in the near future.  This U.S.-China summit is part 
of these efforts. 
 
It is noteworthy that the leaders of the U.S. and China approached 
the North Korean nuclear issue from the aspect of nuclear 
nonproliferation.  They gave almost similar attention to the North 
Korean and Iranian nuclear issues.  Chinese President Hu Jintao 
stressed, "We should move ahead with the denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula and the Six-Party process," adding that like the 
Iranian nuclear issue, the North Korean nuclear issue should also be 
"resolved through dialogue and negotiations."  However, China is 
probably well aware that there is a limit to dialogue and 
negotiations in dealing with North Korea. 
 
At tomorrow's summit, the leaders of the ROK and the U.S. should 
come up with specific measures to bring North Korea back to the 
negotiating table and present them to Six-Party nations, including 
China.  We need to make President Obama, who will visit Seoul for 
the first time, aware that the North Korean nuclear issue is more 
urgent than the Iranian issue.  With Washington's China-focused 
policy, the strengthening of the ROK-U.S. alliance has become more 
desperately needed. 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
"OBAMA EFFECT" SOOTHES LIBERAL GROUPS IN KOREA 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 18, 2009, Page 3) 
 
By Reporter Yoon Wan-joon 
 
Korean liberals have had a much milder response to the Seoul visit 
of U.S. President Barack Obama than toward those of his 
predecessors.  The Allied Conference of Civic Groups Opposing 
Redeployment of Troops to Afghanistan will hold an anti-war 
candlelight vigil today in downtown Seoul opposing the redeployment 
of Korean troops to Afghanistan and urging a stop to the U.S.-led 
occupation of the war-torn country.  The Conference is a gathering 
of 60 civic groups, including the People's Solidarity for 
Participatory Democracy and Korean Solidarity for Social Progress. 
 
SEOUL 00001832  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
A member of People's Solidarity said, "We will demand that the U.S. 
not pressure Korea to send troops to Afghanistan.  We are not 
completely against Obama's visit to Korea."  Yet it is unlikely that 
the civic groups will hold a protest against Obama while he visits 
Seoul, in stark contrast to the fierce demonstration they held when 
his predecessor, George W. Bush, came in August last year. 
 
Analysts say the launch of the Obama Administration has dramatically 
increased Korean affection for the U.S.  Anti-American sentiment, 
which peaked with rallies against U.S. beef imports in the spring of 
last year, has decreased significantly.  In July, the 
Washington-based Pew Research Center surveyed 702 adults, aged 18 
and older, in 25 countries, and found that 78 percent of Koreans 
view the U.S. favorably, the third highest following Kenya, the 
birth country of Obama's father, and Nigeria.  Korean affection for 
the U.S. had steadily decreased from 58 percent in 2000 to 52 
percent in 2002 and further to 46 percent in 2003. 
 
Two reasons explain the improvement in the Korean view of the U.S. 
First is the election of Obama as President.  Koreans recognize the 
power of an American democracy that elected its first 
African-American chief executive. 
 
This is a reflection of international support for Obama's smart 
diplomacy of using dialogue and cooperation.  In 2002, opposition 
mounted against the Bush Administration's use of unilateral 
diplomacy.  Whenever incidents, such as the deaths of two high 
school girls at the hands of the U.S. military, occurred, anti-U.S. 
sentiment erupted.  Liberal groups in Korea, however, have not 
ignored the meaning of Obama's election and his policies. 
 
University of North Korean Studies professor Gu Gap-woo said, 
"Perceptions are changing in a way that there is no reason to hate 
the U.S. if U.S. policies are reasonable.  Liberal groups also have 
raised expectations of the Obama Administration's policies." 
 
The second reason, according to experts, is liberal groups this time 
simply lack a sufficient reason to trigger anti-American sentiment 
or cause and logical grounds for attacks, but their deep-rooted 
hatred of the U.S. remains.  The left-leaning Korean group National 
Liberty, whose existence is based on anti-Americanism, has 
apparently lost a clear target with the launch of the Obama 
Administration.  "Anti-American sentiment that sees the U.S. as a 
persecutor in modern Korean history has not gone away, though the 
Korean impression of the U.S. has grown more positive," Seoul 
National University professor Jeon Sang-in said.  "A friendly 
environment should be created among Koreans and Americans through 
public diplomacy that goes beyond elite-oriented Korean-U.S. 
exchanges." 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>
