^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1762  |  2009-11-04  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 4일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001762

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 4일
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/03/23 07:02//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
＂日·美동맹 포괄적 리뷰 중… 美에 할말 할것＂;하토야마 총리, 최상용 前주일대사와 회견 

중앙일보
정 총리, 오늘 세종시 로드맵 발표

동아일보
LPG 6개社가격담합 제재…사상최대 1조원대 과징금

한국일보
신종플루 '심각' 격상…대응책은 재탕 수두룩

한겨레 신문
'종편채널 퍼주기 특혜' 비판 고조

세계일보
"북, 미와 2차례 공식회담 합의"

서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
카드 '포스단말기' 위험

===== 국내 동향 =====

캐슬린 스티븐스 주한 미국 대사는 3일 "북한이 계속 핵프로그램을 보유한다면 북미 관계정상화가 매우 어려울 것"이라며 "미국은 (핵프로그램을 보유한) 북한과 관계정상화를 고려할 준비가 아직 안 돼 있다"고 밝혔다. (한국, KBS, 연합)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

북한의 조선중앙통신은 어제 “8000개의 폐연료봉 재처리를 8월 말 끝냈으며 추출된 플루토늄의 핵무기화에도 주목할 만한 성과들이 있었다”고 주장했다. (전체)

한국 외교통상부는 북한의 주장을 확인할 방법은 없지만, 사실이라면 “유엔 안보리 결의인 1718호 및 1874호에 따른 비핵화 의무를 위반한 것”이라며 깊은 유감의 뜻을 밝혔다.

미국의 외교 전문지 포린폴리시는 북한의 다자회담 복귀 전에 북한과 미국이 두 차례 회담을 열기로 합의했다고 보도했다. 이 합의는 지난주 미 국무부의 성김 대북특사와 북한 외무성의 리근 미국국장 사이의 협상에서 이뤄졌다고 잡지는 밝혔다. (동아, 한겨레, 세계, 모든 텔레비전)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

모든 한국 언론은 북한이 “8000개의 폐연료봉 재처리를 8월 말 끝냈으며 추출된 플루토늄의 핵무기화에도 주목할 만한 성과들이 있었다”고 3일 주장했다는 소식을 1면과 내부 지면을 할애해 보도했다.

북한의 주장이 사실이라면 북한은 6~8㎏의 플로튜늄을 확보했을 수 있어 핵무기 1개에 보통 6~7㎏이 필요하므로 핵무기 1기 제작에 충분한 양이라고 언론 보도는 말한다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 한국 외교통상부의 입을 빌어 북한의 주장을 확인할 방법은 없지만, 사실이라면 “유엔 안보리 결의인 1718호 및 1874호에 따른 비핵화 의무를 위반한 것”이라며 깊은 유감의 뜻을 밝혔다고 전했다.

대다수 언론은 이번 북한의 발표의 목적이 북핵 문제 처리를 위한 미국과의 직접 대화를 압박하려는 목적이라는 전문가의 견해를 언급하였다. 중도 우파 중앙일보는 특히 분석 기사를 통해 이렇게 말했다: "북한의 움직임은 핵무기 능력 강화를 통해 핵보유국 입지를 굳히려는 뜻을 분명히 한 것으로 풀이된다. …이근 국장이 방미 일정을 끝내고 귀국길에 오른 직후 재처리 완료 발표가 나온 것도 주목할 만한 대목이다. 이는 이근-성 김 회동이 북한의 기대에 미치지 못했다는 방증이 된다."

대다수 언론은 북한의 다자회담 복귀 전에 북한과 미국이 두 차례 회담을 열기로 합의했다는 미국의 외교 전문지 포린폴리시의 11월 3일 기사를 다루었다. 이 합의는 지난주 미 국무부의 성김 대북특사와 북한 외무성의 리근 미국국장 사이의 협상에서 이뤄졌다고 잡지는 밝혔다.

반면 보수 동아일보 사설: "미국은 북핵 해결과 6자회담 재개를 위한 실질적인 성과를 보장받은 뒤에 대화에 나서도 늦지 않다. 미국이 북한을 안이하게 오판하면 국제 공조에 악영향을 미치는 것은 물론이고 오바마 정부의 ‘핵무기 없는 세계’ 비전도 타격을 입는다."
==== 사설/논단 ====

**[[http://news.donga.com/List/3/04/20091104/23874964/2|[사설]북-미, 대화 성사보다 결과가 중요하다]]**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 4일, 35면)

미국 국무부는 2일 이근 북한 외무성 미국국장의 방미로 이뤄진 북-미 접촉을 “유용했다”고 평가했다. 이 국장은 지난달 23일부터 11일 동안 미국에 머물며 6자회담 수석대표인 성 김 특사를 비롯한 미 정부와 학계 인사들을 두루 만났다. 이 국장과 김 특사의 만남은 버락 오바마 미 행정부 출범 이후 북-미 당국자 간 첫 접촉이었다. 미 국무부의 긍정적인 평가는 8월 빌 클린턴 전 대통령의 방북으로 제기된 북-미 대화를 성사 단계로 판단하게 됐다는 뜻으로 풀이된다. 워싱턴에서는 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책특별대표가 이달 방북할 것이라는 전망도 나온다.

이번 접촉으로 국제사회와 북한의 관계가 제재에서 대화 국면으로 전환하는 계기가 마련됐다고 보는 것은 성급한 판단이다. 북한의 조선중앙통신은 어제 “8000개의 폐연료봉 재처리를 8월 말 끝냈으며 추출된 플루토늄의 핵무기화에도 주목할 만한 성과들이 있었다”고 주장했다. 북한 외무성은 하루 전에는 “미국이 우리와 마주앉을 준비가 돼 있지 않다면 우리도 제 갈 길을 가면 될 것”이라며 미국을 협박했다. 분명한 것은 북한이 핵개발을 멈추지 않았다는 점이다. 북-미 대화를 핵군축 협상을 위한 자리로 활용하려는 술책에도 변화가 없다.

미국은 북핵 해결과 6자회담 재개를 위한 실질적인 성과를 보장받은 뒤에 대화에 나서도 늦지 않다. 미국이 북한을 안이하게 오판하면 국제 공조에 악영향을 미치는 것은 물론이고 오바마 정부의 ‘핵무기 없는 세계’ 비전도 타격을 입는다. 더구나 김정일 북한 국방위원장은 원자바오 중국 총리에게 “조-미(북-미)회담 결과를 보고 6자회담을 포함한 다자회담을 진행할 용의가 있다”고 말했다. 협상카드를 세분해 이익을 극대화하려는 특유의 살라미 전술을 써 미국으로부터 원하는 것을 받아낸 뒤에 6자회담 재개 여부를 결정하겠다는 태도다. 이런 북한에 성급하게 맞장구를 칠 일이 아니다. 

북한의 일면 협박, 일면 유화 공세가 집요할수록 한미 공조가 튼튼해야 한다. 한국 정부는 북한이 만족할 만한 변화를 보이기 전에는 금강산 관광과 대규모 식량지원을 재개하지 않을 방침이다. 도발에 대한 보상은 있을 수 없다. 협박까지 동원한 북한의 대화술책에 미국이 빈틈없이 대처해야만 ‘대화를 위한 대화’가 아니라 북의 실질적인 핵 포기를 끌어낼 수 있다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3857650|북, 미국에 핵능력 과시해 몸값 올리기]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 11월 4일, 10면)

예영준 기자

북한이 3일 사용후 핵연료봉 8000개의 재처리 완료와 플루토늄 무기화를 공식 선언했다. 북·미 양자 대화에 대한 미국의 결단을 촉구하며 “미국이 준비가 되어 있지 않다면 우리도 제 갈 길을 갈 것”이라고 밝힌 지 하루 만이다.

북한의 움직임은 핵무기 능력 강화를 통해 핵보유국 입지를 굳히려는 뜻을 분명히 한 것으로 풀이된다. 미국과의 양자 대화를 핵 군축 협상으로 끌고 가겠다는 메시지일 수도 있다. 이번 발표로 북한의 비핵화 과정은 더 복잡하게 됐다. 8월의 플루토늄 재처리 과정도 검증해야 하기 때문이다.

북한의 이번 발표는 북·미 대화에 대한 입장 정리를 미루고 있는 오바마 행정부를 압박하며 공세에 나선 성격이 강하다. 외교 당국자는 북한 발표의 ‘시차’를 유의해 볼 필요가 있다는 견해를 밝혔다. 조선중앙통신 보도에 따르면 사용후 핵연료봉 재처리를 끝낸 시점은 8월 말이다. 북한은 앞서 4월에 재처리 착수를 선언하고 6월에 추출한 플루토늄을 전량 무기화한다고 밝혔다. 4개월간의 작업 끝에 8월 말 재처리를 끝냈지만 공식 발표는 2개월 이상 미뤄 두고 있었던 셈이다.

8월 말이라면 북한이 전방위 유화공세에 한창이던 시점이다. 빌 클린턴 전 미 대통령의 방북과 억류 여기자 석방을 시작으로 개성공단 억류 근로자 석방, 김대중 전 대통령 서거 조문단 파견 등이 차례로 이어졌다. 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표를 초청한 것도 이 무렵이다.

북한은 뒤이어 원자바오 중국 총리를 초청해 6자회담 복귀 의사를 내비쳤다. 유화 분위기 조성에 찬물을 끼얹는 재처리 완료 선언은 카드로 남겨뒀다는 얘기가 된다.

이근 국장이 방미 일정을 끝내고 귀국길에 오른 직후 재처리 완료 발표가 나온 것도 주목할 만한 대목이다. 이는 이근-성 김 회동이 북한의 기대에 미치지 못했다는 방증이 된다. 북한은 2일자 보도에서 “이 접촉은 조·미(북·미) 회담을 위한 예비접촉이 아니었으며 따라서 실질적인 문제가 토의된 것이 없다”고 밝혔다. 이는 쌍방의 원칙적 입장만 재확인하고 보즈워스 방북 일정을 잡는 문제 등에 대해서는 뚜렷한 성과가 없었다는 뜻으로 들린다.

두 사람이 단 둘이 만난 횟수도 당초 예상과 달리 한 차례에 그쳤다. 정부 당국자는 “미국은 북한과 달리 이근-성 김 회동에 큰 의미를 부여하지 않았다”며 “이는 북한이 기존 입장에서 큰 변화가 없었던 데 따른 것으로, 북한의 기대 수준을 낮추기 위한 전술의 일환이기도 하다”고 말했다. 결국 북한의 뒤늦은 재처리 완료 발표는 미국의 미지근한 태도에 대한 불만을 노골적으로 드러낸 것이라 할 수 있다.

또한 북한의 기존 협상 전술에 비춰 보면 언젠가 재개될 북·미 대화와 본격 핵 협상에 대비한 몸값 올리기로도 해석할 수 있다. 협상에 복귀하더라도 핵 능력을 최대한 높인 상태에서 해야 챙길 것이 많다는 게 북한식 셈법이다.

[[http://media.daum.net/politics/dipdefen/view.html?cateid=1068&newsid=20091104024304371&p=hankooki|스티븐스 대사 "北 핵프로그램 계속 보유땐 관계정상화 어려워"]](한국일보, 2009년 11월 4일, 6면)

정상원 기자

캐슬린 스티븐스 주한 미국 대사는 3일 "북한이 계속 핵프로그램을 보유한다면 북미 관계정상화가 매우 어려울 것"이라며 "미국은 (핵프로그램을 보유한) 북한과 관계정상화를 고려할 준비가 아직 안 돼 있다"고 밝혔다.

스티븐스 대사는 이날 국회 귀빈식당에서 열린 국회 한국외교와 동북아평화연구회, 한반도평화통일시민단체협의회 초청 강연에서 이 같이 말했다. 강연 제목은 '오바마 정부의 스마트외교와 한반도 평화 정책'이었다.

스티븐스 대사는 "지금도 미국은 여전히 6자회담 틀 안에서 (북한과) 양자대화를 할 용의가 있다"며 "분명한 점은 이 문제가 미국과 북한 양자 간의 문제가 아니라 다자 간의 문제라는 것"이라고 강조했다.

그는 이어 "6자회담이 중요한 이유는 2005년 9ㆍ19 공동성명이 한반도의 비핵화, 북미 북일관계 정상화, 경제 에너지 지원, 평화협정 체제 등 우리가 원하는 미래를 다 담고 있기 때문"이라며

"지난 26일 성김 미 국무부 북핵특사와 리근 북한 외무성 미국국장의 뉴욕 회동을 계기로 북한이 6자회담에 복귀하기를 진심으로 바란다"고 밝혔다. 그는 "국제사회 전체가 북한의 핵프로그램을 용납할 수 없다는 것을 분명히 하고 있다"며

"북한의 핵뿐만 아니라 탄도 미사일 기술을 관련 국가에 수출할까 지속적인 관심을 갖을 필요가 있다. 북한의 확산 활동을 방지하기 위해 미국 뿐만이 아니라 국제 사회의 모든 국가들이 한목소리로 유엔 안전보장이사회 결의 1718호와 1874호를 전면 이행할 것을 촉구하는 이유이다."

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1762.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001762 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 4, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Japanese Prime Minister: "Japan-U.S. Alliance is 
under Comprehensive Review... Tokyo will Say 
What It Has to Say to America" 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Prime Minister Chung to Announce Roadmap 
for Sejong City Project Today 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Six LPG Suppliers Face Largest Ever Fair Trade Commission Fine for 
Price Fixing 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
ROKG Measures to Contain New Flu Insufficient 
to Ease Public Anxiety 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
ROKG and Ruling Party under Mounting Criticism for Giving Special 
Treatment to Comprehensive Program Channels 
 
Segye Ilbo 
U.S. Foreign Policy Magazine: "N. Korea, U.S. Agree to Hold Two 
Rounds of Official Talks before North Returns to Multilateral 
Talks" 
 
Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
N. Korea Says It Completed 
Reprocessing 8,000 Spent Fuel Rods 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
---------------------- 
 
U.S. Ambassador to the ROK Kathleen Stephens, in a Nov. 3 speech at 
the National Assembly, said: "The U.S. is not prepared to consider a 
completely normalized relationship with a North Korea that insists 
upon having a nuclear weapons program. That makes normalization very 
difficult." (Hankook, KBS, Yonhap) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
North Korea's official Korean Central News Agency said yesterday 
that North Korea "successfully completed reprocessing 8,000 spent 
fuel rods" in late August and made "remarkable achievements in 
weaponizing the extracted plutonium" to strengthen the North's 
nuclear deterrence. (All) 
 
The ROK Foreign Ministry expressed "deep regret," saying: "There is 
no way to confirm the statement, but if it is true, it would be a 
clear violation of UNSC Resolutions 1718 and 1874." (JoongAng) 
 
According to Foreign Policy magazine, the U.S. and North Korea have 
agreed to hold two rounds of official talks before the North returns 
to multilateral talks. According to the magazine, this agreement was 
reached during recent negotiations in the U.S. between Ri Gun, the 
North's No. 2 nuclear negotiator, and Sung Kim, Special Envoy for 
the Six-Party Talks. (Dong-a, Hankyoreh, Segye, all TVs) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
--------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
All ROK media gave front- and inside-page play to North Korea's 
claim yesterday that it "successfully completed reprocessing 8,000 
spent fuel rods" in late August and made "remarkable achievements in 
 
SEOUL 00001762  002 OF 005 
 
 
weaponizing the extracted plutonium" to strengthen the North's 
nuclear deterrence. 
 
According to media reports, if the North's claim is true, the North 
could have obtained some 6-8 kg of plutonium, enough for one nuclear 
weapon, for which about 6-7 kg of plutonium is normally needed. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo quoted the ROK Foreign Ministry as 
expressing "deep regret," saying: "There is no way to confirm the 
statement, but if it is true, it would be a clear violation of UNSC 
Resolutions 1718 and 1874." 
 
Most media cited experts as viewing this North Korean announcement 
as designed to press the USG to hold direct talks to deal with the 
nuclear issue.  Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo, in particular, 
carried an analysis that said: "North Korea seems determined to 
enhance its status as a nuclear state by strengthening its nuclear 
capability. ... Given that this announcement came shortly after Ri 
Gun, the North's No. 2 nuclear negotiator, headed back home after 
talks in the U.S., it may suggest that the talks between Ri Gun and 
Sung Kim, Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks, fell short of the 
North's expectations." 
 
Most media covered a Nov. 3 report by Foreign Policy magazine saying 
that the U.S. and North Korea have agreed to hold two rounds of 
official talks before the North returns to multilateral talks. 
According to the U.S. magazine, this agreement was reached during 
recent negotiations in the U.S. between Ri Gun, the North's No. 2 
nuclear negotiator, and Sung Kim, Special Envoy for the Six-Party 
Talks. 
 
On the other hand, conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized: "It will 
not be too late if the U.S. (waits) to enter into dialogue (with 
North Korea) until after the North takes substantial steps to 
resolve its nuclear issue and to resume the Six-Party Talks.  If the 
U.S. takes a laid-back attitude and misjudges the North, it will 
deal a blow not only to international cooperation but also to the 
Obama Administration's vision for a 'nuclear-free world.'" 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
U.S.-N. KOREA DIALOGUE; RESULTS MORE IMPORTANT THAN DIALOGUE ITSELF 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 4, 2009, page 35) 
 
The U.S. Department of State said on November 2 that Sung Kim, 
Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks, had useful discussions with 
Ri Gun, Director General of American Affairs at North Korea's 
Foreign Ministry.  During his 11-day visit to the U.S. beginning 
October 23, Ri met with U.S. government and academic officials 
including Ambassador Sung Kim.  The meeting between Sung and Ri was 
the first U.S.-North Korea contact since the inauguration of the 
Obama Administration.  The State Department's positive remarks seem 
to signify the USG's position that it is ready to hold bilateral 
talks with the North.  The possibility of U.S.-North Korea bilateral 
talks was raised when President Bill Clinton visited Pyongyang. 
According to sources in Washington, Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth is highly likely to visit North Korea 
this month. 
 
It is too early to say that the U.S.-North Korea contact this time 
will pave the way for the international community to shift toward 
dialogue over sanctions.  North Korea's official Korean Central News 
Agency claimed yesterday that North Korea successfully completed 
reprocessing 8,000 spent fuel rods in late August and made 
remarkable achievements in weaponizing the extracted plutonium.  The 
North Korean Foreign Ministry issued a threatening statement a day 
earlier that if the U.S. is not ready to sit down face to face, 
North Korea will go its own way.  What is clear is that North Korea 
has not ceased its nuclear development.  The North also has not 
changed its tactics to use U.S.-North Korea dialogue as a place for 
nuclear disarmament talks. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001762  003 OF 005 
 
 
It will not be too late if the U.S. (waits) to enter into dialogue 
(with North Korea) until after the North takes substantial steps to 
resolve its nuclear issue and to resume the Six-Party Talks.  If the 
U.S. takes a laid-back attitude and misjudges the North, it will 
deal a blow not only to international cooperation but also to the 
Obama Administration's vision for a 'nuclear-free world.'   In 
addition, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il told Chinese Premier Wen 
Jiabao that his country is ready to rejoin the Six-Party Talks, 
depending on progress in its negotiations with the U.S.  It seems 
that North Korea intends to decide whether to rejoin the Six-Party 
Talks after receiving what it wants from the U.S. through salami 
tactics, in which Pyongyang slices the process of nuclear 
abandonment as thinly as possible in order to maximize its gains. 
The U.S. should not hastily respond to this North Korean maneuver. 
 
 
The ROK and the U.S. should further step up their coordination since 
North Korea has been alternating threats and conciliatory gestures. 
The ROKG 's position is to not resume the Mt. Kumgang tour project 
and massive food aid before the North changes its attitude to a 
satisfactory level.  There should not be any reward for the North's 
provocations.  The U.S. should not hold dialogue for the sake of 
dialogue.  The U.S. will be able to get North Korea to give up its 
nuclear ambitions only when it thoroughly responds to the North 
Korea's tactics of resorting to both threats and dialogue. 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
NORTH KOREA RENEWS PRESSURE ON THE U.S. TO HAVE BILATERAL TALKS 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 4, 2009, Page 10) 
 
By Reporter Ye Young-joon 
 
North Korea officially announced on November 3 that it has completed 
reprocessing 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods and was successful in 
weaponizing plutonium.  This announcement came a day after the North 
urged the U.S. to make a decision on U.S.-North Korea bilateral 
talks, saying, "If the U.S. is not ready (to sit down face-to-face 
with us,) we will go our own way." 
 
North Korea's move is interpreted as meaning that North Korea seems 
determined to enhance its status as a nuclear state by strengthening 
its nuclear capability.  It could also be a message that the North 
will turn bilateral dialogue with the U.S. into nuclear reduction 
talks.  The announcement has made the process of denuclearizing 
North Korea more complicated.  This is because now the process of 
plutonium reprocessing in August should also be verified. 
 
Through this announcement, Pyongyang pressured the Obama 
Administration, which has been postponing laying out its position on 
dialogue with the North.  A diplomatic source said that the timing 
of the announcement is worth attention.  According to the Korean 
Central News Agency, the reprocessing of spent fuel rods was 
completed at the end of August.  Prior to this, in April, Pyongyang 
announced that it would start to reprocess nuclear fuel rods, and, 
in June, Pyongyang said that it would weaponize all extracted 
plutonium.  The reprocessing took four months and was completed by 
the end of August, but Pyongyang delayed its official announcement 
for over two months. 
 
At the end of August, North Korea was in the middle of its "charm 
offensive."  It made a series of conciliatory gestures, such as 
releasing detained U.S. female journalists during former U.S. 
President Bill Clinton's visit, releasing an ROK employee working at 
the Kaesong Industrial Complex, and sending a condolence delegation 
to the ROK for the funeral of the late President Kim Dae-jung.  It 
was around this time that the North invited U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth to Pyongyang. 
 Afterwards, the North also invited Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, 
signaling its intention to return to the Six-Party Talks.  In other 
words, the North did not make the announcement on the completion of 
reprocessing nuclear fuel rods (in August), which could have cast 
 
SEOUL 00001762  004 OF 005 
 
 
cold water on the conciliatory mood, so that it could use it as a 
bargaining chip in the future. 
 
It is also noteworthy that the announcement came shortly after Ri 
Gun, the North's No. 2 nuclear negotiator, headed back home after 
talks in the U.S.  This may suggest that the talks between Ri Gun 
and Sung Kim, Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks, fell short of 
the North's expectations.  North Korea said on November 2, "This 
contact was not a preliminary meeting for the DPRK (North 
Korea)-U.S. talks, and thus there were no substantive discussions 
related to the DPRK-U.S. talks."  This indicates that both sides 
simply reiterated their positions and failed to make concrete 
progress on the schedule for Bosworth's possible visit to the North. 
 Contrary to expectations, Ri and Kim had only one one-on-one 
meeting.  An ROKG official noted, "Unlike the North, the U.S. did 
not give much significance to the Ri-Kim meeting.  This is because 
the North did not show any big change in its position, and it is 
also part of Washington's tactics to lower Pyongyang's 
expectations."  In short, by belatedly announcing that it has 
completed reprocessing spent fuel rods, the North openly expressed 
its displeasure about the U.S.'s lukewarm attitude. 
 
In addition, considering Pyongyang's previous negotiating tactics, 
it can be said that the announcement was intended to strengthen the 
North's bargaining position at possible bilateral talks with the 
U.S. and (multilateral) nuclear negotiations.  Pyongyang thinks that 
it can reap many rewards only when it has increased its nuclear 
capability before returning to dialogue. 
 
 
AMBASSADOR STEPHENS: "U.S. IS NOT READY TO CONSIDER NORMAL RELATIONS 
WITH NUCLEAR-POSSESSING N. KOREA" 
(Hankook Ilbo, November 4, 2009, Page 6) 
 
By Reporter Chung Sang-won 
 
U.S. Ambassador to the ROK Kathleen Stephens said on November 3, 
"The U.S. is not prepared to consider a completely normalized 
relationship with a North Korea that insists upon having a nuclear 
weapons program. That makes normalization very difficult." 
 
Ambassador Stephens made the statement during her speech before the 
Peaceful Unification Forum at the VIP restaurant in the National 
Assembly Main Building.  The title of the speech was the "Obama 
Administration's Smart Diplomacy and Peace Policy toward Korean 
Peninsula." 
 
Ambassador Stephens stressed, "The U.S. remains willing to engage 
North Korea bilaterally within the framework of the Six-Party 
process," adding, "Just to be clear, we do think that this is a 
multilateral issue, not a bilateral issue simply with the United 
States.". 
 
Ambassador Stephens said that the Six-Party Talks are important 
because the September 2005 Six-Party Talks Joint Statement  of 
Principles "remains a good definition of what an eventual outcome 
should look like; a denuclearized Korean Peninsula with new 
opportunities for normalized relations between North Korea and the 
U.S. and North Korea and Japan, much better inter-Korean relations 
with the eventual replacement of the armistice by a more permanent 
peace agreement and, very importantly, quite substantial economic 
and energy assistance.".  She added, "On October 26 Ambassador Sung 
Kim met with North Korean representative Ri Gun in New York.  It is 
our sincere hope that this meeting will start the process of getting 
North Korea back into a multilateral talks process."  Stephens also 
noted, "We have made it clear that the international community as a 
whole is not prepared to accept the notion of nuclear weapons 
programs in North Korea."  She added, "We also need to continue to 
be concerned about North Korea's export of nuclear and ballistic 
missile-related equipment, materials and technologies to countries 
concerned.  And that's why not only the U.S. but all the countries 
in the international community are united in full implementation of 
the relevant UN Security Council resolutions 1718 and 1874 in order 
to prevent proliferation activities by North Korea. " 
 
SEOUL 00001762  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>