^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1980 | 2009-12-21 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 21일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001980

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 21일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/10/19 21:04//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
＂조례 고쳐서라도 전국 모든 학원 야간 수업 금지＂ 이주호 교과부 차관 밝혀 

중앙일보, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
“역대 최악의 예산 국회” 42년 전 기록마저 깼다

동아일보, 한국일보
<‘수험생 사교육 받았다’ 외고 입시때 기재 논란> 학교장-학생 “불이익 우려 거짓말 뻔한데…” 실효성 의문

한겨레 신문
한명숙-곽영욱 만날 때 정세균 동석

===== 국내 동향 =====

복수의 정부 소식통에 따르면 남북이 지난달 개성에서 두 차례 비밀 접촉을 갖고 남북정상회담 등 남북관계 현안에 대해 의견을 교환했지만 북한에 억류되었다고 알려진 국군포로·납북자 송환과 대북 식량지원, 북핵 문제 등에 대한 입장 차 때문에 성과를 거두지 못했다고 한다. ([[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/12/21/2009122100015.html|조선]], 동아, [[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/politics/defense/394405.html|한겨레]], 세계)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

데니스 블레어(Blair) 미 국가정보국(DNI) 국장은 18일 워싱턴포스트에 기고한 글에서 지난 주 태국에서 압류된 북한 무기 화물은 중동으로 향하고 있었다고 말했다. 데니스 국장의 언급은 북한 무기의 목적지에 관한 미 행정부 당국자의 첫 공식 언급이다. (조선, 동아, 세계)

북한은 19일 노동신문 논평에서 “미국의 (대북) 핵 위협을 체계적으로 증대시킨 장본인인 남조선 당국은 핵 문제 논의에 끼어들 체면도 자격도 없다”고 비난했다. ([[http://m.gangnam.joins.com/news/article/article.aspx?total_id=3931688|중앙]])

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 내부 지면을 할애해 데니스 블레어(Blair) 미 국가정보국(DNI) 국장이 이날 워싱턴포스트에 기고한 글을 소개하였다. 그는 "미국 내 기관과 외국 파트너들 사이의 팀워크(team work) 덕분에 중동으로 향하던 북한 무기를 압류할 수 있었다"고 말했다. 데니스 국장의 언급은 북한 무기의 목적지에 관한 미 행정부 당국자의 첫 공식 언급이며 미국의 역할에 관한 첫 공식 확인임을 전했다.

보수 조선일보의 언급: "데니스 국장은 그러나 북한 무기가 구체적으로 중동의 어느 국가로 향하고 있었는지에 대해선 밝히지 않았다." 

==== 코펜하겐 기후 변화 회담 ====

한국 언론은 코펜하겐에서 열린 제15차 기후변화 회의가 구속력 없는 "코펜하겐 협정"을 남긴체 폐막했다는 소식에 주목했다. 코펜하겐 협정은 단순히 지구 기온 상승은 2도 이내로 제한하도록 모든 국가가 온실가스 배출 등을 감축하자는 내용으로 감축 목표 달성을 위한 구체적인 배출 준거를 정하지 못했다.

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설: "지구의 지도자들은 용감하지 못했다. 비겁하게 국가 이기주의의 뒤에 몸을 숨겼다. …머뭇거릴 뿐 결단을 내리지 못했다. 눈앞에 어른거렸던 ‘호펜하겐’(Hopenhagen)은 신기루로 사라졌다. …코펜하겐 협정은 구체적인 알맹이가 없다. 정치 지도자들의 체면을 살리는 선에서 봉합됐다. …이제 숙제는 내년 멕시코 기후회의로 넘어가게 됐다. ‘나부터(Me First)’의 정신으로 무장하고 모두 함께 행동에 나서야 지구와 인류의 생명을 지킬 수 있다."

좌파 성향 한겨레 신문 사설: "이런 결과에 가장 큰 책임을 져야 할 나라는 세계 온실가스 배출량의 40% 이상을 차지하는 세계 2대 강국 미국과 중국이다. 미국을 추월해 세계 최대 배출국이 된 중국은 선진국의 책임을 강조하며 자국이 의무 배출국에 포함되는 데 강력하게 저항했다. …미국도 유럽연합과 일본보다 훨씬 낮은 배출삭감 목표를 제시하는 소극적인 자세를 보여 중국 등 개도국을 설득할 수 있는 지도력을 발휘할 수 없었다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설] 내년엔 체결될 온실가스 협정, 선제적 對備해야**(조선일보, 12월 21일 39면)

"그러나 온실가스협정은 멕시코시티에서 열릴 다음 연례 기후회의까지는 결국 체결될 것으로 봐야 한다. 기존 교토의정서는 2012년까지만 효력을 발휘한다. 기후 변화에 대한 대응 자체를 포기하지 않는 이상 세계 각국은 어떤 식으로든 법적 구속력이 있는 협정을 만들어낼 수밖에 없다. …어차피 감축으로 갈 수밖에 없다면 하루라도 빨리 시동을 거는 게 낫다. 그래야 기업이 관련 기술을 서둘러 개발하고 제도적으로도 앞선 경험을 축적해 국제 경쟁력을 키울 수 있다. 그러기 위해 우선 급한 것이 기업들이 '얼리 무버'로서 온실가스 감축에 자발적으로 나서도록 이끄는 제도적 환경을 만들어주는 일이다."

**[사설]실망스런 기후회의, 미·중의 책임 크다**(한겨레 신문 12월 21일, 31면)

최악은 면했지만 지구촌에 희망을 주기엔 턱없이 실망스러운 결과였다. 지구온난화를 막기 위한 방안을 모색하고자 덴마크 코펜하겐에서 연 제15차 유엔기후변화협약 당사국총회(COP15)가 ‘코펜하겐 협정’을 내놓고 그제 폐막했다. 하지만 선진국의 온실가스 감축 목표와 구속력 있는 협정을 이끌어내는 데는 실패했다. 미국과 중국, 반기문 유엔 사무총장 등이 애써 ‘절반의 성공’이라고 평했지만, 세계 곳곳에선 실망과 비판의 목소리가 터져나오는 이유이다.

이번 코펜하겐 회의는 선진국에 온실가스 감축을 의무화한 교토의정서 체제가 2012년에 종료된다는 점에서 매우 중요한 회의였다. 교토의정서를 이어갈 새로운 합의가 2012년까지 이뤄지지 않으면 2013년 이후 온난화 방지를 위한 국제체제는 사실상 무너지게 된다. 세계 사람들의 관심이 코펜하겐으로 쏠리고, 무려 119개국의 정상들이 회의에 참석한 것도 이런 긴박한 사정 때문이었다.

이런 결과에 가장 큰 책임을 져야 할 나라는 세계 온실가스 배출량의 40% 이상을 차지하는 세계 2대 강국 미국과 중국이다. 미국을 추월해 세계 최대 배출국이 된 중국은 선진국의 책임을 강조하며 자국이 의무 배출국에 포함되는 데 강력하게 저항했다. 선진국과 개도국 중 선진국이 지구온난화에 더욱 많은 책임을 져야 하는 것은 당연하지만, ‘세계의 공장’ 노릇을 하는 중국의 적극적인 자세 변화 없이는 온난화 방지가 불가능한 것이 사실이다. 미국도 유럽연합과 일본보다 훨씬 낮은 배출삭감 목표를 제시하는 소극적인 자세를 보여 중국 등 개도국을 설득할 수 있는 지도력을 발휘할 수 없었다.

이번 협정에서 지구의 기온상승을 산업혁명 이후 섭씨 2도 이내로 제한하고, 기후변화로 심각한 위기를 겪고 있는 빈곤국을 지원할 1000억달러의 기금을 마련하기로 합의한 것은 나름의 성과라고 할 수 있다. 미국과 중국을 비롯한 주요국들은 여기에 머물지 말고, 내년 11월에 열리는 멕시코 회의 전까지 구체적인 감축 목표와 구속력 있는 협정을 만들어내지 않으면 ‘모두가 망한다’는 각오로 지금부터 당장 밀도 있는 협상에 나서야 한다. 내년에 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의를 여는 우리나라도 선진국과 개도국의 이해를 조정해 새 기후협정을 만드는 데 적극 기여해야 할 것이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

===== 특집 =====

**'美 아프간 재건팀' 인디애나 훈련센터 현장을 가다**(조선일보, 12월 21일 6면)

박종세 특파원

앞유리가 박살 난 채 총알자국으로 벌집이 된 자동차, 그 옆에서 무심히 자전거를 수리하고 양탄자를 파는 아프가니스탄 상인들. 현지 다리(dari)어 간판이 붙은 상점들 사이로 빨래가 널린 바자(bazzar·시장) 거리.

미군의 호위를 받는 미국 정부의 지역재건팀(PRT) 10여명이 이 마을의 지도자들과 함께 바자로 들어선 순간, "꽝!" 하고 고막이 터질 듯한 폭발음이 터졌다. 아프가니스탄의 이슬람 근본주의 테러집단인 탈레반이 설치한 급조폭발물(IED)이었다.

"엎드려!" 미군은 엎드려 즉각 사격자세를 취했고, 재건팀원들도 땅에 엎어졌다. IED는 이후에도 2~3차례 연쇄적으로 터졌고, 화약 냄새와 함께 주변으로 자욱한 연기가 번졌다.

"좌측으로! 좌측으로 이동!" 호위하는 미군은 지역재건팀 요원과 현지 마을 지도자들을 건물 왼쪽의 상점 뒤로 일단 엄폐했다.

"드르륵!" 탈레반의 AK 47 소총이 허공을 갈랐다. 바자 거리를 따라 더 나아가는 것은 위험했다. "뒤로 물러나라(Push back)!"

이 상황은 미군이 아프가니스탄에서 일상적으로 겪는 탈레반의 기습을 그대로 재연한 '훈련 상황'이다. 지난 16일, 미국 인디애나주의 머스캐터턱 군사훈련센터(MUTC). 한 달 내에 아프가니스탄에 배치될 미국 농무부·국무부 소속의 PRT 요원 51명이 현지와 똑같은 환경에서 '몰입 훈련'을 받고 있었다.

양털모자에 이슬람 전통 의상을 입은 미국계 아프가니스탄인들이 현지인 역할을 맡았다. 그러나 훈련 참여자들에겐 언제 무슨 일이 발생할지가 철저히 비밀이었다.

인근 2층 건물 옥상에선 교관들이 훈련에 참여한 PRT 요원들의 동작을 촬영하고, 세밀히 관찰했다. 이들이 폭발 굉음 속에서도 당황하지 않고 미군들의 지시를 따르는지, 배운 대로 이동 시에는 앞사람의 어깨에 반드시 손을 얹는지 등을 체크했다.

미국 국제개발처 소속의 존 로든버그(Rothenberg·55)씨는 "폭발음을 듣는 순간 신경이 곤두섰다"고 말했다. 훈련을 맡은 제시카 핼러데이(Halladay) 중위는 "PRT 민간요원들이 위급 상황에서도 허둥대지 않고 군인과 함께 행동하는 법을 몸에 배도록 하는 게 목적"이라고 말했다. 아프가니스탄에서 한 달 전에 복귀한 트레이 휠러(Wheeler) 대위는 "훈련 환경이 현지와 너무 똑같아서 놀랐다"고 말했다. PRT 요원들이 이날 최종 목적지인 협상장으로 가는 순간에도 폭탄은 수시로 터졌다.

간신히 협상장에 도착했지만, PRT는 고집불통의 현지 부족 대표들과 씨름을 벌여야 했다. 관개(灌漑) 시설을 지원하겠다고 제안했지만, 현지 부족들끼리도 서로 "상대방이 더 유리하다"고 고함을 쳐 협상은 진전되지 않았다. 오전 11시가 되자, 현지인들은 갑자기 협상을 중단하고 코란(이슬람 경전)을 외우며 기도하기 시작했다. 모두 현지에서 맞닿게 될 '실제 상황'이었다.

'롤 플레이(role play)'가 끝나자, 꼼꼼히 이를 관찰하던 전문가들이 조언하기 시작했다. "문장을 짧게 나눠서 통역을 시켜야 의미가 정확하게 전달된다" "아프가니스탄 농민들이 협상장에 1, 2시간 늦는 것은 예사다" "사전에 만나 의견을 미리 조율하고, 전체 회의를 가져야 한다"…. 

갑자기 한 아프가니스탄 전문가가 PRT 요원에게 "지금 상대한 부족 지도자의 이름이 뭐냐"고 물었다. "살자이…마흐메드…." PRT 요원은 이름을 제대로 외우지 못해 쩔쩔맸다.

진땀 나는 협상을 마치고 건물을 빠져나오는 이들을 다시 IED 폭발음이 맞았다.

이 훈련프로그램은 지난 7월 시작됐다. 버락 오바마(Obama) 미국 대통령이 아프가니스탄 전쟁의 성격을, 미 해병대를 앞세운 '하드파워' 전쟁에서 PRT를 축으로 한 '소프트파워' 전쟁으로 전환하면서였다. 이에 따라 리처드 홀브룩(Holbrooke) 아프가니스탄·파키스탄 특별대표, 마이크 멀린(Mullen) 미 합참의장과 데이비드 페트레이어스(Petraeus) 미 중부사령관이 증파되는 민간 전문인력을 훈련하는 특별 프로그램을 만들기로 합의했다. 민간요원이 늘어나면서 이들과 미군 사이의 호흡을 맞추는 것이 절실해졌기 때문이었다. 현재 320명 수준인 미국의 민간요원은 내년 1월엔 약 1000명으로 확대된다.

이곳 MUTC에서 현재 하는 훈련 프로그램은 일반 협상, 폭탄 테러 등 6개의 시나리오를 단순한 형태에서 매우 복잡한 형태로 발전시켜가며 적용한다. 이라크에서 PRT 요원이었던 미 농무부의 로널 멜빈(Melvin·63)씨는 "실제 현장에서 겪을 수 있는 내용을 배우고 특히 군인들의 의사소통 방법을 배울 수 있어서 도움이 된다"고 말했다.

**＂한국 국방부 관계자와 아침에도 통화 아프간 파견 한국팀 1월 훈련받을 것＂**
(조선일보, 2009년 12월 21일, 박종세 특파원)

아프가니스탄에 파견되는 미국 민·관·군 요원의 합동 훈련 프로그램을 기획한 민간기업인 맥켈러사(社)의 제임스 맥켈러(McKellar) 사장은 훈련 센터의 목적은 "참가자들이 자기가 속한 조직과 역할을 제대로 알고, 현지인과 현지 정부, 다국적군 부대와도 효과적으로 일할 수 있도록 하려는 것"이라고 말했다. 다음은 그와의 일문일답.

―훈련 효과가 있었나. "물론이다. 실제로 이번 훈련 참가자들 중에는 전에 여기서 훈련을 받은 자들도 있다. 그들은 이 훈련 덕분에, 현지에서 활동하는 데 큰 도움이 됐다고 말한다."

―민간 요원들이 현지에서 겪는 일이란 어떤 것인가. "한마디로, 매우 복잡한 상황에서 동시에 여러 가지 일을 처리할 수 있어야 한다."

―아프가니스탄에 PRT를 보내는 모든 나라에 이 프로그램이 적용될 수 있나. "그렇다. 민·군 합동 훈련프로그램은 반드시 필요하다. 한국과도 논의를 진행 중이다. 한국도 내년에 아프가니스탄에 약 500명의 민관군경(民官軍警) 합동 PRT를 파견한다. 오늘(16일) 아침에도 한국 국방부 관계자와 통화했다. 이르면 내년 1월에 아프가니스탄에 파견되는 한국 PRT 요원의 일부가 이곳에서 훈련받게 될 것이다."

―맥켈러사의 통상적인 업무는. "우리는 직원이 10명밖에 안 된다. 그동안 공무원과 군 요원을 훈련하는 역할을 해왔다. 과거 군대는 민간 요원을 이해하지 못했고, 민간요원은 군대를 몰랐다."

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1980.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 21, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Senior Presidential Secretary for Education Lee Joo-ho Vows to Ban 
Private Cram Schools from Offering Late-Night Classes 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
"Worst National Assembly Ever;" Budget Bill Passage 
Still Up in the Air 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo 
Education Ministry Seeks to Hinder Foreign Language High School 
Applicants Who Voluntarily Admit to Studying at Private Education 
Institutes; Critics Say Voluntary Reporting Makes 
It Too Easy to Sidestep Latest Rules 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Main Opposition Democratic Party Chairman Chung Sye-kyun Found to Be 
Present when Former Prime Minister Han Met Local Businessman Who 
Allegedly Bribed Han 
for Business Favors 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to multiple ROKG sources, the two Koreas held two rounds 
of s-e-c-r-e-t meetings last month to discuss a possible summit, but 
failed to reach agreement due to differences over food aid, the 
North's nuclear issue, and the problem of ROK citizens believed to 
be held in the North. (Chosun, Dong-a, Hankyoreh, Segye) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
----------------- 
 
Dennis Blair, Director of National Intelligence, in a Dec. 18 
contribution to The Washington Post, said that the North Korean arms 
shipment seized in Thailand last week was destined for the Middle 
East. Mr. Blair's reference marked the first public comment by the 
U.S. administration on the destination of the arms. (Chosun, Dong-a, 
Segye) 
 
North Korea, in a Dec. 19 commentary in the Rodong Shinmun, the 
North's major newspaper published by the Workers' Party, said that 
the ROK is not entitled to participate in negotiations on its 
nuclear program because the ROK has systematically augmented nuclear 
threats from the U.S. (JoongAng) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Most ROK media today carried inside-page reports quoting Dennis 
Blair, Director of National Intelligence, as writing in The 
Washington Post on Dec. 18 that the North Korean arms shipment 
seized in Thailand last week was destined for the Middle East.  He 
was further quoted: "Teamwork among different agencies in the U.S. 
and partners abroad just last week led to the interdiction of a 
Middle East-bound cargo of North Korean weapons."  The media noted 
that Blair's reference marked the first public comment by the U.S. 
administration on the destination of the arms and the first official 
confirmation on the U.S. role in the case. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo observed: "Blair did not specify which 
country the North Korean weapons were bound for.  His comment has 
sparked speculation that the North Korean weapons were headed to 
Iran." 
 
SEOUL 00001980  002 OF 005 
 
 
 
Copenhagen Climate Change Conference 
Yesterday's conclusion of the 15th U.N. Climate Change Conference in 
Copenhagen captured the attention of the ROK media.  Most media 
reported that the historic conference ended with only a nonbinding 
"Copenhagen Accord," which simply calls for greenhouse gases and 
other emissions by all nations to be reduced enough to prevent 
average global temperatures from rising more than two degrees 
Celsius, without setting specific emissions guidelines for achieving 
that goal. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "The leaders of the 
planet were not brave. ... They just dithered, preventing Copenhagen 
turning into 'Hopenhagen.'  ... The 'Copenhagen Accord' is short on 
substance and is merely a face-saving measure for political leaders. 
... Now the homework has been carried over to next year's climate 
conference in Mexico City. ... Only when all of us take concerted 
action under the 'Me First' spirit can we save this planet and 
humanity." 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun editorialized: "The U.S. and China 
are largely to blame for this disappointing result, given that they 
account for more than 40 percent of greenhouse gas emissions 
worldwide.  China, which has overtaken the U.S. as the world's 
biggest CO2 emitter, strongly rejected being included in the list of 
countries subject to mandatory emissions-reduction targets while 
stressing the responsibility of advanced nations. ...  The U.S., for 
its part, could not show leadership to persuade developing countries 
by taking such a lackadaisical attitude as proposing an 
emissions-reduction target much lower than those of the EU and 
Japan." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
"PREEMPTIVE MEASURES NEEDED IN ANTICIPATION OF TOUGHER CARBON 
REDUCTION RULES" 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 21, Page  39) 
 
"It is highly likely that a global warming pact will be reached 
before the next climate summit, which will take place in Mexico City 
next year.  The current Kyoto Protocol is set to expire in 2012, and 
as long as the world does not give up battling global warming, the 
international community has little choice but to come up with a 
legally-binding treaty. ... If there is no choice but to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, then it is best to get started as soon as 
possible.  Doing so will allow Korean businesses to get a head start 
in developing the technologies and building the experience needed to 
become globally competitive.  In order to make this happen, the ROKG 
must establish a system that will allow businesses to become 'early 
movers' and take voluntary steps to cut their emissions." 
 
MEDIATING THE INTERESTS OF DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING NATIONS FOR 
CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, December 21, Page 31) 
 
The worst was avoided, but the results are still not enough to give 
the international community hope.  The 2009 United Nations (UN) 
Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen had set out to search for 
ways to stop global warming and concluded on Dec. 19 with the 
Copenhagen Accord.  The climate change conference failed to bring 
about an agreement that binds developed countries to greenhouse gas 
emission targets.  This is why, despite what the U.S., China and UN 
General Secretary Ban Ki-moon are working hard to call a "half 
victory," voices of disappointment and criticism are being heard 
throughout the world. 
 
The results from the Copenhagen talks are significant as the Kyoto 
Protocol, which made greenhouse gas reductions mandatory for 
developed nations, comes to an end in 2012.  If steps towards a new 
agreement to extend the Kyoto Protocol are not made, the 
international community's commitment to reduce greenhouse gases will 
virtually collapse by 2013.   As a result, the attention of the 
 
SEOUL 00001980  003 OF 005 
 
 
world has been focused on Copenhagen and the leaders of 119 nations 
in attendance. 
 
The U.S. and China are largely to blame for this disappointing 
result, given that they account for more than 40 percent of 
greenhouse gas emissions worldwide.  China, which has overtaken the 
U.S. as the world's biggest CO2 emitter, strongly rejected being 
included in the list of countries subject to mandatory 
emissions-reduction targets while stressing the responsibility of 
advanced nations.  It makes sense that between developed and 
developing nations, it is developed nations that must bear greater 
responsibility for global warming, but it is true that preventing 
global warming is impossible without a change in China's posture. 
The U.S., for its part, could not show leadership to persuade 
developing countries by taking such a lackadaisical attitude as 
proposing an emissions-reduction target much lower than those of the 
EU and Japan. 
 
There are what could be considered some positive results in the 
Copenhagen Accord, including the proposal to keep the rise in global 
temperatures to within two degrees since the Industrial Revolution 
and the creation of a 100 billion dollar fund to assist poor 
countries dealing with serious crises due to climate change. 
However, major nations, including the U.S. and China, must not stop 
here and should continue to work until the Mexico conference set for 
next November to reach an agreement with binding force and concrete 
reduction targets.  The ROK, too, which serves as the host for the 
next G-20 summit next year, must actively contribute to creating a 
new climate change agreement by mediating the interests of developed 
and developing nations. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
U.S. PROVINCIAL RECONSTRUCTION TEAM IN AFGHANISTAN PARTICIPATES IN 
MUSCATATUCK URBAN TRAINING CENTER EXERCISE 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 21, Page 6) 
 
By Correspondent Park Jong-se 
 
A car sits riddled by bullets, its windshield shattered.  Afghan 
merchants repair a bicycle and sell carpets nearby in an indifferent 
manner.  On a bazaar street, the wash is hung out to dry between 
shops with signboards written in the local dari language. 
 
Dozens of U.S. Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) personnel, 
escorted by U.S. soldiers, enter the bazaar along with village 
leaders. A deafening explosion cuts through the air.  The bomb:  an 
improvised explosive device (IED) made by the Taliban, the Islamic 
fundamentalists in Afghanistan. 
 
The U.S. soldiers immediately drop to the ground, ready to shoot. 
PRT personnel also fall to the ground.  A few more IEDs explode. 
The smell of gunpowder fills the air and thick smoke blankets the 
surrounding area. 
 
"To the left! To the left!"  U.S. soldiers had PRT members and 
village leaders take cover behind a (nearby) shop. 
 
An AK-47 rifle shot from the Taliban slices through the air.  It is 
too dangerous to advance along the bazaar street.  "Push back!" 
 
This is the description of a training exercise that reenacts the 
Taliban's sudden attacks that plague Afghanistan every day.  On 
December 16, fifty-one PRT personnel from U.S. Departments of 
Agriculture and State, who will be dispatched to Afghanistan in a 
month, participated in this intensive training exercise at 
Muscatatuck Urban Training Center in Indiana. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001980  004 OF 005 
 
 
Afghan-Americans wearing wool hats and traditional Islamic clothes 
played the role of Afghans.  However, participants didn't have the 
slightest idea of what would happen and when. 
 
On the roof of a nearby two-story building, instructors filmed and 
closely observed every move of the PRT personnel.  They checked to 
make sure the participants accurately followed the directions of 
U.S. soldiers, did not panic amid the explosions, and were putting 
their hands on the shoulders of those in front of them when moving. 
 
 
John Rothenberg from the U.S. Agency for International Development 
said that just the sound of a bomb blast set his nerves on edge. 
Lieutenant Jessica Halladay said that this exercise is aimed at 
making sure that PRT personnel learn how to act along with soldiers 
by not panicking in case of an emergency.  Captain Trey Wheeler, who 
returned from Afghanistan a month ago, said with surprise that the 
exercise is conducted under conditions (similar) to those in 
Afghanistan. 
 
Immediately after PRT members headed to a venue for negotiation, 
which was their final destination, the bomb went off. And even 
though they (did eventually) manage to arrive at the negotiating 
venue, PRT personnel still had to argue with stubborn tribal 
representatives about their proposal to  provide irrigation 
facilities (within the area).  Negotiations stalled when tribal 
representatives fell into dispute among themselves, with each tribal 
leader saying that the other leaders would benefit more than they 
would from the deal.  Around eleven o'clock, local representatives 
put an abrupt end to the negotiations and began to cite the Koran 
and pray.  These all described real circumstances they might 
encounter in Afghanistan. 
 
When the role-playing situation ended, experts, who closely observed 
the exercise, gave advice:  "You should make your sentences short so 
that they are clearly interpreted."  "It is common for Afghan 
farmers to be late to the negotiating venue by one or two hours." 
"You should coordinate ideas through a preliminary meeting and then 
hold a comprehensive meeting." 
 
An expert on Afghanistan suddenly (interrupted the debriefing) to 
quiz a PRT member, "What is the name of the (tribal) leader you just 
dealt with?"  "Sajai... Mahmed..."  The PRT member mumbled, (unable 
to recall the name). 
 
When they exited the building after completing the tortuous 
negotiations, another IED detonated. 
 
This training program started this past July around the time U.S. 
President Barack Obama changed the nature of the war in Afghanistan 
from a "hard-power" war reliant on U.S. Marine Corps to a 
"soft-power" war based on Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs). 
Accordingly, Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan 
Richard Holbrooke, U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
Admiral Michael Mullen, and Commander of the U.S. Central Command 
David Petraeus agreed to establish a special program designed to 
train civilian experts.  This was because, with the number of 
civilian staff increasing, there was a desperate need for 
coordination between them and U.S. troops.  Currently U.S. civilian 
staff (in Afghanistan only number) about 320 people, but the number 
(is expected to) increase to an estimated 1,000 in January. 
 
Training programs at the MUTC are based on six different scenarios, 
including those reenacting general negotiations, terror bombings and 
(other common situations in Afghanistan), ranging from the very 
basic to the very complex.  Ronal Melvin, 63, with the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, who once worked as a PRT member in Iraq, 
said, "This kind of training is helpful since it teaches you how 
soldiers  communicate and what really happens on the ground." 
 
 
 "I SPOKE WITH ROK DEFENSE MINISTRY OFFICIALS OVER THE PHONE THIS 
MORNING ... THE ROK TEAM BEING DISPATCHED TO AFGHANISTAN WILL 
RECEIVE TRAINING IN JANUARY" 
 
SEOUL 00001980  005 OF 005 
 
 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 21, 2009, Page 6) 
By Correspondent Park Jong-se from MUTC 
 
James McKellar, President of McKellar, a private company planning a 
civilian-military-government joint training program, said, "Training 
centers are aimed at ensuring that participants are knowledgeable 
about the organization that they belong to and its roles, and that 
they work effectively with local residents, local governments, and 
multinational forces."  Below are excerpts from an interview with 
him. 
 
Q. Have the trainings (your company has performed up until now) been 
effective? 
A. "Of course, they have.  A number of the participants currently 
being trained have received previous training here (in Muscatatuck) 
They commented that the training was very helpful for them." 
 
Q.  What kind of things do civilian staff have to deal with on the 
ground? 
A. "In short, they must (be able to) deal with many things 
simultaneously in a very complicated situation." 
 
Q. Can this program be applied to every nation that sends a PRT to 
Afghanistan? 
A. "Yes.  A civilian-military joint training program is certainly 
necessary., and we have had discussions with the ROK about this. 
Next year, the ROK will send a roughly 500-member-strong joint PRT 
(to Afghanistan) that will include civilians and others from the 
government and the military and police forces.  I talked with ROK 
Defense Ministry officials over the phone this morning (December 
16), and (confirmed that) some of the PRT members being deployed to 
Afghanistan in January at the earliest will train here (in 
Muscatatuck)." 
 
Q. What business does McKellar usually engage in? 
A. "We only have ten employees.  So far, we have engaged in training 
civil servants and military staff.  In the past, the military did 
not understand the civilian staff, and the civilian staff did not 
understand the military." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>