^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  [[https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/09SEOUL1463_a.html|09SEOUL1463]]  |  2009-09-14  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론보도; 2009년 9월 14일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001463

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울, 언론보도; 2009년 9월 14일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/01/18 00:56//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
반도체·LCD·차(車) 더 강해졌고/ 철강·조선은 중(中) 도전에 고전

중앙일보
“북·미 직접 대화”

동아일보
신종플루 ‘가을의 공포’/ 이틀동안 3명 숨졌다

한국일보
한반도 ‘대전환 기류’: 북미대화의 방식과 장소는 앞으로 2주일 내에 결정; 중국 원자바오 총리 다음날 김정일과 회동 가능성

한겨레 신문
북-미 곧 회담…북핵, 대결서 대화로

세계일보
미(美), 보즈워스·강석주 회동 추진

서울신문
성장률 -5.1→2.6%…OECD 최고

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

필립 크롤리 국무부 공보담당 차관보가 9월 11일 정례브리핑에서 미국은 북한과의 양자 대화에 돌입할 준비가 되어 있다고 말했다. 그는 “북한이 6자회담에 복귀하는 것을 설득하고 비핵화를 위한 긍정적인 조치를 끌어낼 수 있다"고 덧붙였다. (전체)

관련 소식으로 청와대의 핵심 참모는 13일 “북한의 비핵화를 위해서라면 북-미 직접대화를 반대할 이유가 없다”며 북-미 양자 대화에 대해 적극적인 환영의 뜻을 나타냈다. (동아, 한국)

일본 마이니치신문은 중국의 원자바오 총리가 북중 외교 수립 60주년을 기념하기 위해 다음 달 초순 북한에서 열리는 ‘북·중 친선의 해’ 행사 폐막식 참석차 북한을 방문할 계획이라고 밝혔다. (전체)

김정일(金正日) 북한 국방위원장이 미국과 국제사회의 대북(對北) 제재가 강화될 경우 3차 핵실험 실시를 시사했다고, 미국 AP통신과 폭스TV가 '열린북한방송'을 인용해 12일 보도했다. (조선)

중국 공안당국 보고서에 의하면 중국이 2003년 10월 압록강을 떠내려온 56명의 북한 사람 시신을 수습했다고 한다. 이들은 탈북을 시도하다가 북한 병사에 의해 사살된 것이 확실시된다. (전체)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

모든 한국 언론은 오늘 1면을 할애해 필립 크롤리 국무부 공보담당 차관보의 9월 11일 정례브리핑 발언을 보도했다. 그는 브리핑에서 북한과의 양자 대화에 들어갈 준비가 되어 있다고 말했다. 크롤리 차관보는 "북한이 6자회담에 복귀하는 것을 설득하고 비핵화를 위한 긍정적인 조치를 끌어낼 수 있다"며 “양자대화의 방식과 장소는 앞으로 수주일 내에 결정하려고 한다.”면서 “언제 어디서 대화가 진행될지는 기다려봐야 할 것”이라고 말했다고 언론은 전했다.

관련 소식으로 보수 동아일보와 중도 한국일보는 미국의 움직임을 환영하는 청와대 핵심 참모의 발언을 전했다. “북한의 비핵화를 위해서라면 북-미 직접대화를 반대할 이유가 없다.” 동아일보는 또 북한이 핵 야욕을 유지하면서도 원하는 것을 이번 대화 과정을 통해서 얻을 수 있다는 잘못된 메시지를 보낼 수 있으며 북미 대화 과정에서 한국이 배제될 수 있다는 한국 당국의 우려도 역시 언급했다.

보수 조선일보는 정부 당국자는 13일 "현재 추진되고 있는 미·북 대화는 이전과는 다른 형태가 될 것이다. 과거에는 '대화의 시작'이 곧 '제재의 중단'을 의미했지만, 지금은 미국이 의미 있는 비핵화가 담보되지 않는 한 제재를 지속한다는 점을 분명히 하고 있다"고 말했다.

한국 신문은 아래와 같은 1면과 내부 지면 기사를 게재했다: <美 ＂北과 회담할 것… 날짜·장소 2주내 결정＂;美국무부 밝혀> (보수 조선일보); <[뉴스분석] 보즈워스 내달 방북 유력 … 미 언론 “커다란 정책 전환”> (중도 우파 중앙일보); 北-美 양자대화 접근 / 지지율 떨어진 오바마, 외교성과 조급증?> (보수 동아일보); <뉴스 분석/북-미 곧 회담…북핵, 대결서 대화로> (좌파 성향 한겨레신문)

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설: "북핵 해결을 위해 미국이 북한과 대화하는 것 자체는 불가피하다고 본다. 문제는 형식과 속도다. …무엇보다 초기엔 초강경으로 대응하다. 막판엔 지나치게 유화적으로 대처하는 등 오락가락했던 부시 전 미 대통령 정부의 전철을 오바마 정부가 따라가지 않기를 바란다."

보수 동아일보의 사설 주장: "미국은 북한을 6자회담에 복귀시키기 위한 의도임을 분명히 했다. 그러나 북-미 대화가 6자회담을 대체하거나 북의 통미봉남(通美封南) 전술에 이용될 가능성을 경계해야 한다. 아울러 북-미 대화를 계기로 대북 제재가 유야무야되는 일도 없어야 한다."

중도 한국일보 사설: "중요한 것은 북미 대화가 반드시 북한의 6자 회담 복귀와 핵폐기 협상으로 이어지는 모멘텀이 되어야 한다는 점이다. …하지만 북한은 핵 보유국 지위의 인정을 고집할 가능성이 커 대화 전망은 불투명하다."

보수 조선일보는 9월 12일 미국 AP통신과 폭스TV가 서울 거점 인권단체인 '열린북한방송'을 인용한 보도를 전했다. 이 단체는 김정일(金正日) 북한 국방위원장이 미국과 국제사회의 대북(對北) 제재가 강화될 경우 3차 핵실험 실시를 시사했다고 주장했다. 김 위원장이 당과 군 간부들에게 "미국이 대화에 응하지 않고 제재를 강화할 경우 '더 강력한' 3차 핵실험도 강행할 결사의 각오를 가져야 한다"고 말했다고 한다.

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[김대중칼럼]오바마의 '김정일 구하기'(조선일보, 2009년 9월 14일 34면)**

김대중 조선일보 고문

북한이 그토록 바라왔던 미·북 양자(兩者) 대화를 미국이 받아들였다. 그 실마리는 아마도 지난 8월 초 클린턴 전 미국 대통령의 방북에서부터 찾아야 할 것 같다. 미국 여기자 2명의 석방을 위해 평양을 방문한 클린턴이 북한 국방위원장 김정일을 만났을 때 보즈워스 미 대북특사의 방북을 주선했다고 VOA(미국의 소리) 방송이 12일 보도한 것을 보면 클린턴은 빈손으로 간 것도 아니고 김정일도 공짜로 기자를 내준 것이 아닌 모양이다. 기자 석방과 미·북 직접 접촉은 별개인 양, 그래서 오바마의 대북자세는 결연했던 것처럼 선전됐던 것은 한마디로 쇼였다.

북한은 오바마의 등장 이후 6자회담의 틀을 고집하는 미국의 입장에 변화가 없자 지난 7월 15일 북한 권력서열 2인자인 김영남(최고인민회의 상임위원장)의 입을 통해 북한은 6자회담에 복귀하지 않겠다며 "6자회담은 영원히 끝났다"고 선언해 버렸다. 클린턴의 방북내용을 타진한 중국은 6자회담 의장인 우다웨이 외교부 부부장을 8월 17일부터 21일까지 평양에 보내 '6자회담 틀 안에서의 양자 회담'을 설득하고 종용했으나 오로지 미·북 양자회담에만 매달리는 북측의 입장만 확인했다. 어쩌면 그때 이미 북측의 그런 의지를 '양해'했다고 보는 것이 옳을 것이다. 미국 국무부가 북·미 대화를 발표하면서 관련국의 "컨센서스(합일점)가 형성돼 있다"고 한 것은 중국의 양해를 시사하는 것이다.

북한은 우다웨이와의 접촉을 계기로 미·북 양자 대화의 분위기를 밀고 나간 것으로 보인다. 8월 21일 김대중 전 대통령의 조문단으로 서울에 온 김기남 등은 이명박 대통령과의 23일 면담자리에서 김정일의 메시지를 전달했다. 그는 떠나면서 흡족한 결과를 얻은 듯이 말했다. '남과 북 지도층의 만남'을 미끼로 던지면서 미국과의 만남이 먼저 이뤄질 것을 주장했을 것이다. 이어 9월 1일 북한의 외무성 부상인 김영일을 단장으로 하는 북한 대표단이 베이징을 방문했고 북한은 개성에 억류 중인 기업인과 연안호 선원을 석방하는 한편 남북 이산가족 재회프로그램을 재가동하고 금강산 관광도 다시 열 듯이 유연하게 나왔다.

북한은 그러는 와중에 9월 3일 보즈워스 미 특사가 6자회담 타진차 한·중·일 3국 순방에 나서는 날 유엔안보리 의장에게 서한을 보내 북한의 우라늄 농축이 성공적으로 진행돼 마무리 단계에 있고 폐연료봉 처리도 마무리 단계이며 이미 추출한 플루토늄도 무기화하고 있다고 발표했다. 일견 북한의 대미 접근책과 어울리지 않는 강경노선인 듯 보이지만 실은 북한의 그런 기술개발을 차단하는 일이 시급하며 미국이 더 이상 시간을 끌면 자신들은 그 길로 갈 수밖에 없음을 내비치는, 일종의 '미·북 대화 촉진제'로 띄운 것이라는 것이 오바마의 자문 역할도 했던 조엘 위트 전 미국 국무부 북한담당관의 설명이다.

그동안 외교분야에서 별다른 실적을 보이지 못한 오바마 대통령이 근자에 "당선되면 적대국과 과감한 협상을 하겠다는 공약은 어디로 갔느냐"는 미국 내 비판자들의 목소리에 눌린 듯하지만 어쩌면 북한의 '우라늄농축 마무리'발언은 오바마의 대북 입지(立地)를 살려주는 '짜고 치는 고스톱'의 인상마저 준다. 보즈워스가 3국 순방을 마치면서 "북한의 태도에는 변한 것이 없다"거나 "6자회담의 틀이 아닌 양자회담은 없다"거나 "평양에 갈 계획이 없다"는 등의 발언을 했던 것도 이제 와서 보면 양자회담으로 가기 위한 연막작전이 아니었던가 느껴질 정도다.

그러면 북한은 왜 미·북 대화에 이처럼 절실히 매달리는 것일까? 북한은 지금 심각한 위기에 처해 있다는 것이 북한 관측통들의 일치된 견해다. 냉해(동해안지역)에, 폭우(황해도 지역)에, 비료부족으로 인한 병충해(평안도 지역)마저 겹쳐 북한은 내년 초가 생사의 갈림길이라고 한다. 지난 98년 식량 위기 때 못지않은 위기가 닥쳐오고 있는데 한국은 핵 포기를 앞세워 원조를 않고 있고 미국의 지원은 이미 끊긴 데다 중국마저 북한을 압박하는 상황이며, 대내적으로는 김정일의 중병설, 권력승계의 잡음 등이 겹쳐 북한은 이 위기의 출구로 미국을 잡고 있는 것이라는 분석이 지배적이다.

우리 정부의 태도는 과연 이명박 대통령의 자신감만큼 안정되고 믿을 만한 것인가? MB는 11일 안보자문단 모임에서 북핵문제에 '새로운 전기(轉機)'가 마련될 것처럼 얘기하면서 남북 대화 분위기의 주도적 유지 필요성을 강조했다. 하지만 북한은 한반도문제와 북한의 생존문제에 관한 한, 한국을 보조적, 부차적 또는 제3자적 존재로 여기고 있다는 것이 황강댐 방류사건으로 여실히 드러나고 있다. 

결국 앞으로 미국이 북한과의 협상에서 북한의 평화적 핵에너지 이용권을 구실로 핵의 유지를 인정하고 북한의 경수로 건설에 필요한 지원을 논의하는 데 있어 한국은 '돈과 기술만 대는' 과거 행태의 재연에 이끌려 다니는 꼴이 되지 않으리란 보장이 없다. 우리 외무부가 "대북 제재는 계속돼야 한다"는 한가한 논평이나 내고 당국자들은 "북의 의도는 통하지 않을 것"이라고 엉뚱한 소리를 해대고 있는 동안, 오바마의 '실용'은 서서히 가동되고 있고 MB의 '실용'은 거기에 끌려갈 수밖에 없다면 북의 김정일은 또 한번 쾌재를 부를 것이다. 김정일이 식량 위기, 경제난 등으로 인해 핵을 포기하고 개혁·개방으로 갈 수밖에 없는 절호의 기회를 한·미는 또 놓치고 있다. 98년에 그랬듯이.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설]북-미 대화 재개, 한반도 평화의 전기 돼야**

(한겨레신문, 2009년 9월 14일 31면)

한반도 주변 정세의 변화 기류가 빨라지고 있다. 빌 클린턴 전 미국 대통령의 방북 이래 북한의 유화 공세가 다층적으로 진행되더니 드디어 미국이 북한과 양자 대화에 나설 뜻을 밝혔다. 필립 크롤리 미국 국무부 공보담당 차관보는 지난 주말 정례 브리핑에서 회담 개최에 대한 관련국들의 양해를 얻었음을 분명히 하고, 앞으로 2주일 내에 시기와 장소 등에 대한 결정을 내릴 것이라고 말했다.

미국은 이번 회담의 성격을 6자회담에 북한을 복귀시키기 위한 것으로 한정하지만, 버락 오바마 대통령의 집권 이후 처음으로 북-미 간 본격 대화가 시작된다는 점에서 그 의미는 가볍지 않다. 대화에 의한 국제분쟁 해결을 주창해온 오바마 정권이 등장하면서 북-미 관계 급진전에 대한 기대가 고조됐지만, 북한이 로켓 발사 등 강경 대결 정책을 들고 나오는 통에 9개월여를 흘려보낼 수밖에 없었다. 탐색전에 너무 많은 시간을 허비한 점은 안타까운 일이지만, 그만큼 문제 해결의 필요성에 대한 인식이 높아진 것은 이점이다.

20세기식 냉전이 지속되는 유일한 지역인 한반도의 평화는 북한 핵 문제와 체제 불안 문제를 동시에 해결하지 않고는 불가능하다. 그런 점에서 북한과 미국이 한반도 평화의 초석을 깐다는 심정으로 이번 회담에 임해, 이들 문제 해결과 관련해 상당한 진전을 이뤘던 6자회담을 복원시켜야 한다. 북한 핵 문제가 논의된 지 20년이 돼 가는데 계속 쳇바퀴만 돌 수는 없다.

북-미 양자회담이 성과를 내려면 주변국, 특히 일본과 우리 정부의 전향적 자세가 절실하다. 두 나라의 대북 강경론은 그동안 북한 핵 문제 해결에 걸림돌로 작용했다. 그러나 16일 출범하는 일본의 민주당 정부는 북한과의 대화 가능성을 열어두는 등 변화의 조짐을 보이고 있다. 반면 이명박 대통령은 현재의 변화 기류를 “남북관계에 있어 중대한 전환기이자 격동기”라고 인정하면서도 기존의 정책 기조 유지를 고집한다. 안타까운 일이 아닐 수 없다. 그의 말대로 한반도는 2000년 남북 정상회담 이후 시작됐으나 부시 정권 등장으로 중단됐던 한반도 평화 프로세스가 다시 본격화하는 격동기로 진입하고 있다. 이러한 때에 핵심 당사자가 돼야 할 우리 정부가 낡은 생각에 사로잡혀 변화를 따라가지 못하다간 우리 문제에 스스로 방관자가 되는 어리석음을 범하게 된다. 이제라도 대북 정책을 전면 재검토하기 바란다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설]북-미 대화, 성과 있는 6자회담이 담보돼야(동아일보, 2009년 9월 14일 35면)**

북한의 5월 2차 핵실험 도발을 계기로 국제사회의 대북 제재가 계속되는 가운데 북한과 미국 간의 양자 대화 가능성이 커지고 있다. 필립 크롤리 미국 국무부 공보담당 차관보는 11일 “미국은 북한과 대화할 준비가 돼 있다”면서 “2주일 내에 (회담 시기와 장소 등을) 결정하겠다”고 밝혔다. 미국은 북한을 6자회담에 복귀시키기 위한 의도임을 분명히 했다. 그러나 북-미 대화가 6자회담을 대체하거나 북의 통미봉남(通美封南) 전술에 이용될 가능성을 경계해야 한다. 아울러 북-미 대화를 계기로 대북 제재가 유야무야되는 일도 없어야 한다.

최근 북한의 유화 공세 속에서 미국은 북의 6자회담 복귀를 대화의 전제조건으로 계속 내세우기 어려웠을 것이다. 미국은 스티븐 보즈워스 국무부 대북정책특별대표의 한국 중국 일본 순방을 통해 북-미 대화에 대한 6자회담 당사국들과의 사전조율도 마쳤다. 우리 정부도 그동안 북핵 문제 해결을 전제로 북-미 대화를 지지해온 만큼 북-미 대화를 부정적으로만 볼 필요는 없다.

그러나 이번 대화의 목적이 단순히 북한의 6자회담 복귀를 이끌어내기 위한 것이라면 곤란하다. 북한은 언제든지 회담장을 박차고 나갈 수 있다는 점을 국제사회는 충분히 확인했다. 따라서 본격적인 북-미 대화는 6자회담의 성과를 담보할 수 있어야 한다. 회담장에 돌아온 북의 지연전술에 휘말려 허송세월하는 일이 되풀이되어선 안 된다.

북의 회담 복귀만으로 북핵 문제가 해결될 것으로 보는 낙관론도 경계해야 한다.

정부는 국내외 일각에서 6자회담 활성화를 위해 대북 제재를 완화하거나 해제해야 한다는 주장이 나올 경우에 대비책을 세워야 한다.

미국을 비롯한 국제사회는 대화만으로는 북을 움직일 수 없음을 명심하고 북의 핵 포기가 확인될 때까지 제재가 계속된다는 점을 확실히 해야 한다.

북은 현재 국제사회의 제재를 모면하고 권력 세습과 김정일 권력 강화를 위해 시간을 벌어야 할 절박한 상황이라는 분석이 지배적이다. 북한이 북-미 대화를 곤경에서 벗어날 기회로 악용하지 못하게 하기 위해선 철저한 국제공조가 필수적이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 북미대화 재개 핵폐기 협상으로 이어져야(한국일보, 2009년 9월 14일 39면)**

미국이 마침내 북한과의 양자 대화에 나선다. 미 국무부는 지난 주말, 북한과 양자 대화를 할 준비가 돼 있으며 시간과 장소는 2주일 안에 결정할 것이라고 밝혔다. 지금 분위기로는 이달 말이나 내달 초, 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표 일행이 평양을 방문할 것으로 전망된다. 그간의 우여곡절에 비춰 속단은 금물이지만 오랫동안 교착됐던 북핵 문제 논의가 새 국면을 맞은 것은 분명하다.

미국은 그 동안 북한의 6자 회담 복귀 또는 최소한 복귀의사 표명을 대화의 전제조건으로 내걸고 유엔안보리 제재 등을 통해 북한을 압박해왔다. 그런 미국이 '선 대화'로 방향을 돌린 것은 중대한 변화다. 미국이 제재를 앞세우면 이미 추출한 플루토늄의 무기화와 우라늄 농축 강행 등 핵 억제력 강화로 맞서겠다는 북한의 반발에 유연하게 대응할 필요성을 느낀 듯하다. 과거 부시 행정부처럼 제재와 압박을 고수해 북한의 핵 능력만 키우는 결과를 되풀이해서는 안 된다는 판단도 작용했을 법하다.

중요한 것은 북미 대화가 반드시 북한의 6자 회담 복귀와 핵폐기 협상으로 이어지는 모멘텀이 되어야 한다는 점이다. 미국도 바로 이런 목적에서 북미 대화를 갖는다는 점을 분명히 했다. 보즈워스 특별대표는 최근 한ㆍ중ㆍ일 순방에서 이러한 입장을 밝히고 관련국의 동의를 얻은 것으로 알려졌다. 하지만 북한은 핵 보유국 지위의 인정을 고집할 가능성이 커 대화 전망은 불투명하다. 관련국과의 긴밀한 공조를 한층 강화해야 하는 이유다.

이달 말과 내달 초에는 북미 양자 대화 외에도 유엔 총회와 미국 피츠버그 G20 금융정상회의, 원자바오 중국 총리의 방북 등 한반도 정세에 적지 않게 영향을 미칠 외교 이벤트가 여럿 예정돼 있다. 정부는 이러한 기류 변화에 능동적으로 대처할 채비를 갖춰야 한다. 본격적 대화 국면으로의 전환은 아니라는 인식은 자칫 흐름을 놓칠 우려가 있다. 다소 유동적이지만 최근 변화 기미가 두드러지는 남북 관계에서도 과감하게 접근할 필요가 있다.

**[사설] 북·미대화 재개 … 부시 정부 전철 밟아선 안 돼(중앙일보, 2009년 9월 14일 46면)**

미국이 조만간 북한과 대화를 시작하기로 했다. 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표가 10월 초께 평양을 방문할 가능성이 크다고 한다. ‘6자회담은 영원히 끝났다’고 버티는 북한에 ‘6자회담에 복귀하지 않으면 대화는 없다’고 압박하던 미 정부 입장이 일단 바뀐 것이다. 또 이달 하순 유엔 총회와 10월 1일 중국의 60주년 건국절 축하자리에서 북·미 사이에 고위급 접촉이 이뤄질 가능성도 있다. 한반도와 동북아시아 정세가 새로운 전기를 맞고 있어 주목된다.

미 정부는 북한을 6자회담에 복귀하도록 하기 위한 대화라고 설명하고 있다. 북핵 해결을 위해 미국이 북한과 대화하는 것 자체는 불가피하다고 본다. 문제는 형식과 속도다.

결론부터 말하면 지난 20여 년 동안 실패를 거듭한 미국의 핵협상 과정이 이번에도 되풀이돼선 안 된다는 것이다. 무엇보다 초기엔 초강경으로 대응하다. 막판엔 지나치게 유화적으로 대처하는 등 오락가락했던 부시 전 미 대통령 정부의 전철을 오바마 정부가 따라가지 않기를 바란다. 부시 전 대통령은 취임 초 북한을 ‘악의 축’으로 규정한 뒤 일체의 대화를 거부하며 압박 일변도로 치달았다. 그러다 부시 정부 임기 말을 1년여 앞둔 2007년 10월 북한이 1차 핵실험을 강행하자 이에 굴복, 방코델타아시아(BDA) 은행 제재로 대표되는 대북 압박을 풀고 북한과 전면 협상에 나섰다. 그 결과 6자회담이 한동안 굴러가긴 했지만, 지나친 유화적 협상에 대한 미 의회 일각의 비판이 거세지자 다시 핵 폐기 검증 절차 문제를 물고늘어져 아무런 소득도 얻지 못한 채 임기를 마쳤다.

오바마 정부가 북한과 대화를 시작하겠다고 결심한 데에는 몇 가지 배경이 있을 수 있다. 우선 제재만으로는 수년 안에 북한이 핵을 포기토록 할 전망이 어둡다는 점이 가장 크게 작용했을 것이다. 또 의료보험 개혁 등 국내 문제로 지지도가 떨어지는 것을 의식, 대외관계에서 ‘새로운 돌파구’를 찾을 필요성도 있을 법하다. 그러나 어떤 경우라도 미국 정부가 망각해선 안 되는 대목이 있다. 그것은 북한 핵은 반드시 폐기돼야 한다는 점이다. 미국은 이를 한시라도 망각해선 안 된다.

북한의 핵 보유 의지가 강한 만큼 북핵 협상은 어려울 수밖에 없다.

따라서 협상은 장기전일 수밖에 없다. 어렵고 긴 협상을 통해 북핵 폐기라는 목표를 달성하기 위해선 원칙을 훼손하지 않겠다는 강한 의지가 필수적이다. 이런 점에서 6자회담이라는 협상 틀을 계속 고수하겠다는 미 정부 입장은 바람직하다. 특히 모든 합의를 깨고 핵 개발을 진전시켜온 북한에 대해 가하고 있는 상응한 수준의 제재도 지속돼야 한다. 최소한 북한이 핵 포기 의지를 행동으로 입증할 때까진 말이다.

지금까지 북한과 협상에서 ‘당근과 채찍’이란 협상 전략이 제대로 작동한 적이 없다. ‘약한 채찍과 과도한 당근’으로 북한에 악용되기만 했다. 그러나 약한 채찍이라도 시간이 길어지면 강한 채찍이 될 수 있다는 점을 미국 정부는 유념하고, 일관성 있는 대응을 하길 바란다.

토콜라
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1463.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001463 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; September 14, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
A Year after "Lehman's Collapse," ROK's Semiconductor, 
LCD and Automobile Industries Have Grown Stronger, but Steelmakers 
and Shipbuilders Have Been Outpaced 
by Chinese Rivals 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
U.S. Ready for Talks with N. Korea 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Death Toll from New Flu Reaches Seven over Weekend 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
September, October Critical Moment for N. Korea Issues 
U.S. to Decide How and Where to Hold Talks with N. Korea within 
Couple of Weeks; China's Premier Wen Jiabao May 
Visit N. Korea Next Month to Meet Kim Jong-il 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
From Confrontation to Dialogue: U.S., N. Korea 
to Hold Talks Soon 
 
Segye Ilbo 
U.S. Seeks Meeting between Bosworth and N. Korea's First 
Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
ROK's Economy Grows 2.6 Percent in Second Quarter of This Year, 
Highest among OECD Nations 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs Philip J. Crowley, 
in a Sept. 11 regular briefing, said that the U.S. is prepared to 
enter into a bilateral discussion with North Korea. He added: "It's 
designed to convince North Korea to come back to the Six-Party 
process and to take affirmative steps toward denuclearization." 
(All) 
 
In a related development, a key (ROK) Blue House official was quoted 
as welcoming the U.S. move, saying: "There is no reason to oppose 
bilateral talks between Washington and Pyongyang if the talks are 
aimed at denuclearizing North Korea." (Dong-a, Hankook) 
 
According to Japan's Mainichi Shimbun, China's Premier Wen Jiabao is 
planning to visit North Korea early next month to attend the closing 
ceremony of the China-North Korea Friendship Year, which marks the 
60th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the two countries. 
(All) 
 
According to AP and Fox TV citing Open Radio for North Korea, a 
Seoul-based rights group, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il has warned 
of a third nuclear test if the U.S. and the international community 
intensify sanctions against North Korea. (Chosun) 
 
According to a report by Chinese authorities, China in 2003 
retrieved the corpses of 56 North Koreans floating in a border river 
after they were apparently shot dead by North Korean soldiers while 
trying to defect. (All) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-North Korea 
------------ 
All ROK media today front-paged Sept. 11 press remarks by Assistant 
 
SEOUL 00001463  002 OF 007 
 
 
Secretary of State for Public Affairs Philip J. Crowley, in which he 
said that the U.S. is prepared to enter into a bilateral discussion 
with North Korea.  He was further quoted: "It's designed to convince 
North Korea to come back to the Six-Party process and to take 
affirmative steps toward denuclearization.  When it'll happen, where 
it'll happen, we'll have to wait and see.  We'll be taking some 
decisions in the next couple of weeks in light of our recent 
consultation." 
 
In a related development, conservative Dong-a Ilbo and moderate 
Hankook Ilbo quoted a key Blue House official as welcoming the U.S. 
move, saying: "There is no reason to oppose bilateral talks between 
Washington and Pyongyang if the talks are aimed at denuclearizing 
North Korea."  Dong-a Ilbo also noted that there is concern among 
Seoul officials that the U.S.-North Korea talks may send a wrong 
message to Pyongyang that it can achieve what it wants through such 
talks while keeping its nuclear ambitions, and that the ROK may 
become alienated in the bilateral process between the U.S. and North 
Korea. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo, meanwhile, quoted an ROKG official as 
saying: "The envisioned U.S.-North Korea talks will be different 
from those in the past.  In the past, the start of (U.S.-North 
Korea) dialogue meant the end of sanctions (against North Korea,) 
but the U.S. is making it clear that it will continue sanctions 
(against North Korea) unless a meaningful denuclearization (of the 
North) is guaranteed." 
 
Newspapers carried the following front-and inside-page headlines: "A 
Shift in U.S. Strategy on N. Korea: 'We Are Willing (To Have) 
Dialogue to Facilitate Six-Party Talks'" (conservative Chosun Ilbo); 
"Bosworth Highly Likely to Visit N. Korea Next Month... U.S. Media 
Call Washington's Move a Major Policy Shift" (right-of-center 
JoongAng Ilbo); "Is Obama Getting Impatient with Lack of Foreign 
Policy Achievements, Faced with Declining Approval Ratings?" 
(conservative Dong-a ilbo); and "From Confrontation to Dialogue: 
U.S., N. Korea to Hold Talks Soon" (left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun) 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "It is believed that 
U.S.-North Korea dialogue is inevitable in order to resolve the 
North Korean nuclear standoff.  The issue is the format and timing 
of the dialogue.  ...  Above all, we hope that the Obama 
Administration will not follow in the footsteps of the previous Bush 
Administration, which took an inconsistent approach toward North 
Korea by adopting an ultra hard-line stance in its early days and 
turning excessively conciliatory in its final days." 
 
An editorial in conservative Dong-a Ilbo argued: "Washington should 
exercise caution to ensure that the U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks 
don't replace the Six-Party Talks or that the U.S. will not be used 
by North Korea to exclude the ROK from discussion of issues 
surrounding the Korean Peninsula.  Furthermore, the bilateral talks 
should not result in derailing the Six-Party Framework." 
 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo editorialized: "What matters is that 
U.S.-North Korea talks should provide momentum for North Korea to 
return to the Six-Party Talks and engage in denuclearization 
negotiations. ...  However, the prospect of holding the Six Party 
talks seems uncertain because North Korea is highly likely to insist 
on being recognized as a nuclear state." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo carried Sept. 12 AP and Fox TV reports 
citing "Open Radio for North Korea," a Seoul-based rights group, as 
claiming that North Korean leader Kim Jong-il has warned of a fresh 
nuclear test if the U.S. and the international community intensify 
sanctions, by saying (to his party and military leaders): ""You 
should be ready to conduct a third and more powerful nuclear test if 
the U.S. intensifies sanctions without dialogue with the North." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
OBAMA'S "SAVING KIM JONG-IL" 
 
SEOUL 00001463  003 OF 007 
 
 
(Chosun Ilbo, September 14, 2009, Page 34) 
 
By Senior Editorial Writer Kim Dae-joong 
 
The United States seems to have agreed to hold the bilateral 
dialogue that North Korea wanted so badly.  The visit by former U.S. 
President Bill Clinton to Pyongyang in early August may have been a 
turning point which contributed to (the possibility of dialogue.) 
Voice of America on Saturday said that Clinton proposed to Kim 
Jong-il that U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Stephen 
Bosworth should visit North Korea.  The report suggests that Clinton 
did not go empty-handed when he sought the freedom of the two U.S. 
journalists detained in the North.  The U.S. position was that the 
journalists' release was entirely separate from any direct 
Washington-Pyongyang contact and that President Barack Obama's North 
Korea policy was unchanged. 
 
Seeing no change in the U.S. insistence on maintaining the framework 
of the Six-Party nuclear talks since the inauguration of the Obama 
Administration, the North's no. 2 man, Kim Yong-nam, on July 15 said 
that the North will not return to the Six-Party Talks, which are 
"over for good."  China dispatched its Vice Foreign Minister and 
Chief Nuclear Negotiator Wu Dawei to Pyongyang on Aug. 17-21, for 
the purpose of attempting to persuade the North Korean leadership to 
hold bilateral talks within the framework of the Six-Party Talks. 
That only made the North insist more strongly on having bilateral 
Washington-Pyongyang talks.  China probably knew this in advance. 
Now the U.S. State Department says that consensus has been formed 
within the (other Six Party Talks) countries that direct 
Washington-Pyongyang talks can take place after all. 
 
So North Korea appears to have prevailed.  The North Korean 
delegation to the funeral of former President Kim Dae-jung, led by 
two senior officials, conveyed their leader Kim Jong-il's message to 
President Lee Myung-bak on Aug. 23.  Upon leaving, the delegation 
made remarks suggesting they were satisfied with the results of the 
meeting.  They must have told the South to agree to bilateral talks 
between the North and the U.S. in return for another inter-Korean 
summit.  On Sept. 1, a North Korean delegation, headed by Vice 
Foreign Minister Kim Yong-il, visited Beijing.  Earlier, Pyongyang 
took a series of conciliatory steps like the release of a South 
Korean worker detained in the border city of Kaesong and the release 
of the crew of the fishing boat 800 Yeonan which had been abducted 
to the North, and the resumption of family reunions and package 
tours to the Mt. Kumgang resort. 
 
Yet, on Sept. 3, when Bosworth left for a tour of South Korea, China 
and Japan to sound out their views on the Six-Party Talks, North 
Korea, in a letter to the UN Security Council chairman, announced 
that its experimental uranium enrichment entered the "final stage," 
that the reprocessing of spent fuel rods is being completed, and 
that already extracted plutonium is being turned into weapons.  This 
sounds like saber-rattling incompatible with the North's attempts to 
approach America, but in fact is a kind of a stimulant to 
Washington-Pyongyang dialogue, suggesting that it is urgent for the 
U.S. to stop the developments and that the North has no alternative 
but to take that route if the U.S. procrastinates, according to Joel 
Wit, a former U.S. State Department official who was a consultant to 
Obama. 
 
Obama seems to have been pressured by the criticism in the country 
that there is no progress in his campaign pledge to talk to 
America's enemies, and North Korea's uranium claim almost gives the 
impression that it was pre-arranged so Obama could revive his pledge 
and talk (with North Korea.)  Bosworth's remarks on completing his 
three-country tour -- that nothing has changed in North Korea's 
attitude and that there will be no bilateral talk outside the 
framework of the Six-Party Talks -- may have been a smoke screen. 
 
Why does North Korea so desperately want to talk to the U.S.?  Many 
experts believe that the North faces a crisis.  Damage from cold 
weather, heavy rains and blight has hurt the harvest to the point 
where another famine looms.  At this point, South Korea has 
suspended aid until the North denuclearizes, American aid has 
 
SEOUL 00001463  004 OF 007 
 
 
already been suspended, and even China is not as forthcoming as it 
used to be.  Coupled with rumors of Kim Jong-il's ill health and 
problems involving the succession, the North is seeking an exit 
strategy, and is looking to the U.S. 
 
Is our government's attitude as stable and trustworthy as President 
Lee's confidence suggests?  In a meeting with security advisers on 
Friday, Lee spoke of a "turning point" in the North Korean nuclear 
issue and stressed the need to maintain leadership in the atmosphere 
of inter-Korean dialogue.  But it seems that the North does not 
think of Korea as an equal partner in discussing issues related to 
the Korean Peninsula, and the recent unannounced opening of the 
floodgates of the Hwang River Dam is clear evidence of what it 
really thinks. 
 
There is no guarantee that the U.S. will not recognize the North as 
a nuclear state, under cover of letting it use nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes, and that the South will not be dragged around in 
a replay of the past pattern where Seoul provided all the money and 
technology for the construction of light-water reactors in the 
North.  If Obama's pragmatism kicks in, and Lee's pragmatism compels 
him to follow, Kim Jong-il will utter cries of delight once again. 
South Korea and the U.S. are in danger of missing, as they did in 
1998, the best opportunity to get the North to abandon its nuclear 
programs and opt for reform and opening. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
U.S.-N. KOREA DIALOGUE SHOULD LEAD TO DENUCLEARIZATION NEGOTIATIONS 
 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, September 14, 2009, Page 31) 
 
Changes are proceeding apace in the political situation surrounding 
the Korean Peninsula.  After numerous multi-layered conciliatory 
measures from North Korea, following a visit by former U.S. 
President Bill Clinton, the U.S. and North Korea have finally 
declared plans to engage in bilateral dialogue.  Philip J. Crowley, 
Assistant Secretary of the U.S. State Department's Bureau of Public 
Affairs, made it clear in a regular briefing last weekend that both 
countries have consented to talks and that a decision on a time and 
place will be determined within the next two weeks. 
 
Although the U.S. is limiting the character of these talks to an 
attempt to bring North Korea back to the Six-Party Talks, the 
significance of these talks should not be taken lightly in that they 
will represent the first real dialogue between the two countries 
during U.S. President Barack Obama's administration.  Hopes had been 
high for rapid advancements in North Korea-U.S. relations with the 
arrival of this administration, which has been advocating dialogue 
as a way to resolve international conflict, but it has taken nine 
months to get the two countries to this point following North 
Korea's policy of hard-line confrontation such as its rocket launch 
in April.  It is a shame that so much time and energy has been lost 
in finding out each other's true intentions but, on the positive 
side, there is a greater understanding of the need for a solution. 
 
Peace on the Korean Peninsula, the only region in the world still 
caught up in a 20th century-style Cold War, is impossible without a 
simultaneous resolution regarding North Korea's nuclear program and 
its concerns about the stability of its system.  In that sense, both 
North Korea and the U.S. need to approach these talks as an 
opportunity to lay the groundwork for peace on the peninsula and to 
bring back the Six-Party Talks, which made considerable headway 
towards resolving these issues.  The issue of North Korea's nuclear 
program has been under discussion for the past 20 years.  The 
parties involved cannot keep spinning their wheels. 
 
For bilateral talks between North Korea and the U.S. to produce any 
results, the governments of interested nations, in particular those 
of Japan and South Korea, urgently need to adopt a future-oriented 
approach.  Their hard-line positions on North Korea have thus far 
been an obstacle to solving the North Korean nuclear issue.  Some 
 
SEOUL 00001463  005 OF 007 
 
 
signs of change are in the air, however.  For example, the 
Democratic Party of Japan that will be taking over the government on 
Wednesday has opened up the possibility for dialogue with North 
Korea.  In contrast, President Lee Myung-bak insists on adhering to 
his present policy tone even while acknowledging that the current 
changes represent "both a momentous turning point and a period of 
upheaval for inter-Korean relations."  This cannot be seen as 
anything but a shame.  The Korean Peninsula is entering a period of 
upheaval in which the peace process that began after the 2000 
inter-Korean summit, but was halted when the George W. Bush 
Administration took office in the U.S., is once again gaining steam. 
South Korea's government should be playing the role of a core 
participant at this time, but if the Lee Administration gets trapped 
in outdated ways of thinking and is unable to keep up with the 
changes, it will foolishly make us bystanders of our own issues. 
The government's North Korea policy should be reexamined at once. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
N.K.-U.S. BILATERAL TALKS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, September 14, 2009, Page 35) 
 
Amid continued international sanctions on North Korea after its May 
2 nuclear test, the possibility of bilateral talks between Pyongyang 
and Washington is increasing.  P.J. Crowley, Spokesman of the U.S. 
State Department, said Friday that the U.S. is ready for dialogue 
with North Korea, adding that Washington will decide on the time and 
venue for the talks within two weeks.  The U.S. made it clear, 
however, that the talks are intended to get North Korea to return to 
the Six-Party Talks.  Yet Washington should exercise caution to 
ensure that the U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks don't replace the 
Six-Party Talks or that the U.S. will not be used by North Korea to 
exclude the ROK from discussion of issues surrounding the Korean 
Peninsula.  Furthermore, the bilateral talks should not result in 
derailing the Six-Party Framework. 
 
Washington may have found it difficult to keep demanding that 
Pyongyang return to the Six-Party Talks as a precondition for 
bilateral talks amid the North's latest peace offensive.  Through 
the visits by U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy 
Stephen Bosworth to South Korea, China and Japan, the U.S. has 
coordinated with the other parties to the Six-Party Talks regarding 
(the possible) bilateral dialogue between Washington and Pyongyang. 
As South Korea has expressed support for the bilateral dialogue as 
long as it helps resolve North Korea's nuclear program, there is no 
need to view the Washington-Pyongyang talks from a negative 
perspective. 
 
Yet the purpose of the talks should not just be to get North Korea 
to return to the Six-Party dialogue.  The international community 
knows that the North can walk away from the negotiating table at any 
time.  Therefore, full-fledged bilateral talks should ensure that 
the Six-Party framework is maintained and its results (implemented.) 
 No more time should be wasted because of Pyongyang's delay tactics. 
 
 
Caution is also needed to temper optimism that the North's return to 
the negotiating table will end its nuclear threat.  Seoul should 
also be fully prepared to counter any argument that easing or 
lifting sanctions on Pyongyang should be done to reactivate the 
Six-Party Talks. 
 
The international community should remember that mere dialogue 
without sanctions for North Korea's behavior is not enough to get 
the communist state moving.  Sanctions must remain until it has been 
confirmed that the communist state has abandoned its nuclear 
program. 
 
The dominant view is that Pyongyang is in a desperate situation and 
needs to buy time to avoid international sanctions and to solidify 
its power succession process.  Thorough international coordination 
is essential to prevent the North from taking advantage of its 
 
SEOUL 00001463  006 OF 007 
 
 
bilateral dialogue with the U.S. to get out of its dire 
predicament. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
U.S-NORTH KOREA DIALOGUE SHOULD LEAD TO DENUCLEARIZATION 
NEGOTIATIONS 
(Hankook Ilbo, September 14, 2009, page 39) 
 
The U.S. is moving to hold bilateral talks with North Korea.  The 
U.S. State Department said on Friday that the U.S. is prepared to 
enter into a bilateral discussion with North Korea, adding that 
Washington will decide on the time and venue for the talks within 
the next two weeks.  Considering current circumstances, U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth is expected 
to visit Pyongyang late this month or early next month.  It may be 
too early to jump to this conclusion given complicated relations 
between the U.S. and North Korea.   However, it is clear that the 
long-stalled discussion over the North Korean nuclear issue has 
entered a new phase. 
 
The U.S. has put pressure on North Korea through UN sanctions while 
demanding as the precondition for bilateral talks that Pyongyang 
return to the Six-Party Talks or at least express its intention to 
do so.  This U.S. shift to a "dialogue-first" approach marks a 
significant change.  It seems that the U.S. has realized the need to 
react flexibly to the North Korean position that if the U.S. puts 
sanctions first, it will respond by bolstering its nuclear 
deterrence such as weaponizing its already-extracted plutonium and 
enriching uranium.  It appears that the U.S. also judged that it 
should not repeat the same mistake of encouraging North Korea to 
boost its nuclear capability by sticking to pressure and sanctions 
as the past Bush Administration did. 
 
What matters is that the U.S.-North Korea talks should provide 
momentum for North Korea to return to the Six-Party Talks and engage 
in denuclearization negotiations.  The U.S. also made it clear that 
bilateral talks with North Korea will be held for this purpose. 
Ambassador Bosworth revealed this position during his recent visits 
to the ROK, China and Japan to win consent from those countries (to 
the bilateral U.S. - North Korea dialogue.)  However, the prospect 
of holding the Six Party Talks seems uncertain because North Korea 
is highly likely to insist on being recognized as a nuclear state. 
This is why (the other Six Party) countries should continue to 
cooperate closely. 
 
Later this month and early next month, other diplomatic events, such 
as the UN General Assembly, the G20 financial summit in Pittsburgh 
and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao's visit to North Korea, are scheduled 
to take place in addition to U.S.-North Korea talks.  These events 
are expected to have a considerable impact on the Korean Peninsula. 
The ROKG should be prepared to proactively respond to the changing 
situation (in dealing with North Korea.)  Some people have expressed 
concern that if the ROKG does not accept the fact that the U.S. and 
North Korea are moving towards having a dialogue, the ROKG will be 
sidelined.  The ROKG should take a flexible but bold approach to 
inter-Korean relations which have recently shown noticeable signs of 
change. 
 
 
RESUMPTION OF U.S.-NORTH KOREA DIALOGUE 
(JoongAng Ilbo, September 14, 2009, Page 46) 
 
The U.S. has decided to resume dialogue with North Korea soon. 
There is reportedly a high possibility that U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth may visit 
Pyongyang in early October.  In response to the declaration by North 
Korea that "the Six-Party Talks are completely over," the U.S. 
applied pressure, saying, "There will not be dialogue unless the 
North returns to the Six-Party Talks;" but the U.S. has now changed 
its stance.  High-level contact between the U.S. and North Korea may 
be held during the UN General Assembly meeting late this month or 
 
SEOUL 00001463  007 OF 007 
 
 
during the October 1 celebration of the 60th anniversary of the 
foundation of China.   The situation on the Korean Peninsula and 
Northeast Asia is entering a new phase. 
 
The USG explains that any dialogue will be aimed at bringing North 
Korea back to the negotiating table.  It is believed that U.S.-North 
Korea dialogue is inevitable in order to resolve the North Korean 
nuclear standoff.  The issue is the format and pace of the dialogue. 
 In short, the U.S.'s 20-year-old process of failed nuclear 
negotiations should not be repeated this time again.  Above all, we 
hope that the Obama Administration will not follow in the footsteps 
of the previous Bush Administration, which took an inconsistent 
approach toward North Korea by adopting an ultra hard-line stance in 
its early days and turning excessively conciliatory in its final 
days.  Early in his presidency, former President Bush labeled the 
North as part of the "axis of evil" and rejected any dialogue with 
it.  But when North Korea conducted its first nuclear test in 
October, 2007, a year before Bush's presidency expired, Washington 
lifted its financial restrictions against the North and came forward 
for talks with the communist state.  As a result, the Six-Party 
Talks proceeded for some time but, faced with criticism by some U.S. 
lawmakers of the Administration's "too soft" stance on Pyongyang, 
the Bush Administration again insisted on setting out a procedure 
for verifying nuclear dismantlement in the North and did not produce 
any results until its term ended. 
 
There may be several reasons why the Obama Administration decided to 
restart dialogue with the North.  First of all, the administration 
may have taken into consideration the pessimistic view that 
sanctions are not sufficient to make North Korea give up its nuclear 
ambitions in the short term.  In addition, mindful of his declining 
job approval ratings over domestic issues, such as health insurance 
reforms, President Obama may have needed to find a "new 
breakthrough" in U.S. foreign relations.  However, there is an 
(important) point that the USG should not forget under any 
circumstance: it is the principle that North Korea must get rid of 
its nuclear weapons.  The U.S. should not forget this point even for 
a moment. 
 
As the North is strongly committed to possessing nuclear materials, 
it will be difficult to proceed with the North Korean nuclear talks. 
 Therefore, the negotiations will inevitably be prolonged.  In order 
to achieve the goal of nuclear dismantlement in North Korea through 
a difficult and long process, it is essential to have a strong 
determination not to undermine the principle.  In this sense, the 
USG is right to stick to the Six-Party framework.  In particular, 
sanctions imposed on North Korea - a nation which broke all 
agreements and has made progress on nuclear development - should 
also be maintained at least until the North demonstrates its 
commitment toward nuclear abandonment through action. 
 
So far, the strategy of using both "carrots and sticks" in 
negotiations with North Korea has not worked properly.  North Korea 
has just used "weak sticks and excessive carrots" to its advantage. 
However, the U.S. should bear in mind that even weak stick measures, 
if maintained for a long time, will produce a strong effect on the 
North and the U.S. should take a consistent approach toward the 
North. 
 
 
TOKOLA 
</file>