^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09seoul1941 | 2009-12-14 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 11일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001941
 
국방부망 배포
 
행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 11일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/09/06 11:04//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 중앙일보, 동아일보, 모든 텔레비전.
외고 학생수 줄여 존속 내신은 영어성적만 반영

한국일보, 한겨레 신문
북-미 ‘입맞춘듯’ 긍정반응…‘협상 큰그림’ 접근 

세계일보
2010 경제정책 방향/..“내년 성장률 5%”/경제 회복 강한 자신감 반영 

서울신문
내년 일자리 20만개 늘린다

===== 국내 동향 =====

북한이 10일 신종플루 극복을 위한 한국 정부의 항 바이러스 약품 지원을 받아들이기로 했다. 한국 정부는 타미플루 등 신종플루 치료제제 50만명 분을 북한에 제공할 계획이다. (전체)
===== 국제 뉴스 =====

미국 대북정책 특별대표 스티븐 보즈워스는 3일간의 방북 일정을 끝마치고 서울에서 가진 기자회견 자리에서 "북한과 6자회담 재개의 필요성에 대해 공통의 이해 관계에 도달했다"고 기자들에게 밝혔다.

그는 하지만 "북한이 언제, 어떤 방식으로 6자회담에 복귀할 것인지는 좀 더 두고 봐야 한다"며 북한의 6자회담 복귀를 위해서는 추가 협상이 필요하다는 점을 시사했다. (전체)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한: 버시바우 대사의 방북 ====

스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 3일간의 방북에 대해 언급한 내용이 대다수 신문에 의해 대대적으로 다루어졌다.

중점적으로 다뤄진 보즈워스 대사의 발언: "6자회담 재개의 필요성과 역할, 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행의 중요성에 대해 어느 정도 공통의 이해에 도달했다", "북한이 언제 어떤 방식으로 6자회담에 복귀할지는 좀더 두고 봐야 하며 6자회담 당사자간 추가 논의가 필요하다", “김 위원장과의 면담은 요청하지도, 만나지도 않았다”, “중요한 것은 이번 만남이 협상이 아닌 탐색적인 대화였다는 점이다”, “오바마 대통령의 친서문제와 관련해서는 저 자신이 바로 메시지.”

대다수 언론은 추가적인 북미 대화는 북한을 배제한 5자 협의 이후에 있을 것으로 예상하였다.

보수 조선일보는 보즈워스 대사의 평양 방문에 대해 대화의 모멘텀 유지 측면에서 성공적으로 보았고, 사설에서 이렇게 말했다. "실제 6자회담이 열리기까지는 북한과 다른 6자회담 참가국 사이에 쉽지 않은 외교적 협상이 남아 있다는 뜻이다."

보수 동아일보 사설: "명시적으로 6자회담 복귀를 약속하지 않은 북한에 대해 성급하게 후한 평가를 할 수는 없다. 굳이 이번 회담의 성과를 꼽자면 미국과 북한이 처음으로 속마음을 교환한 것 정도이다. …북한이 미국에 6자회담의 필요성을 인정했다면 시간을 끌 이유가 없다. 북한의 6자회담 복귀가 늦어질수록 유엔의 대북 제재로 인한 고통이 커질 수밖에 없다."

중도 한국일보 사설: 보즈워스의 이번 방북이 전혀 무의미했다고 생각하지는 않는다. 무엇보다 양측이 6자회담의 존재 근거인 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행의 중요성에 대해 공감대를 가졌다는 것은 6자회담 복원 가능성에서 진일보를 뜻한다. 보즈워스 특별대표의 말대로 북측 관계자들과 "솔직하고 진지하게 의견을 나눴다"면 양측간 신뢰도 더 깊어졌을 것이다. 이를 발판 삼아 … 추후 대화를 통해 이른 시일 내에 6자회담 재개에 합의할 수 있기를 기대한다."

좌파 한겨레신문 사설: "이제 미국의 협상 의지를 확인한 이상 북한이 결단을 내릴 차례다. 무엇보다 6자회담 복귀를 더 미룰 이유가 없다. 평화협정이든 관계정상화든 경제지원이든 회담이 재개돼야 본격적으로 논의할 수 있다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설] 보즈워스 ＂북한도 6자회담 필요성엔 공감했다＂**(조선일보, 2009년 12월 11일, 35면)

보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 3일간의 방북을 마치고 빈손으로 복귀했지만, 그는 "북한 강석주 외교부 1부부장 등과 만나 솔직하고 진지한 대화를 나눴다"며 "미국과 북한은 2005년 공동성명 이행의 중요성과 6자회담의 필요성과 역할에 더해 에 공감했다"고 밝혔다.

보즈워스는 "북한이 언제, 어떻게 6자회담에 복귀할지는 좀 더 두고 봐야 할 것이며 (한국 중국 일본 러시아 등) 6자회담 당사국들과 추가 논의가 필요하다"고 했다. 실제 6자회담이 열리기까지는 북한과 다른 6자회담 참가국 사이에 쉽지 않은 외교적 협상이 남아 있다는 뜻이다.

보즈워스는 북한의 미·북 한반도 평화협정 체결 요구에 대해 "6자회담이 재개되면 참가국 모두 한반도 평화체제를 논의할 준비가 돼 있다"고 말했다. 2005년 9월 6자회담에서 채택한 9·19 공동성명에 "한반도의 항구적 평화체제에 관한 협상을 갖는다"고 돼 있는 만큼 미국이 북측에 전달한 입장은 6자회담 원칙에 벗어나지 않는다는 것이 미국측 설명이다.

북한은 미·북 평화협정 논의를 6자회담 복귀의 명분으로 삼으려 할 것이고 6자회담이 열리면 주한미군 철수 주장까지 펼 가능성이 높다. 한반도 평화협정은 남·북한이 주체가 되고, 미국 중국 등은 보조적 역할을 하는 게 옳다. 정부는 북한은 물론 미·일·중·러까지 설득할 수 있는 치밀한 논리와 대비책을 강구해야 할 것이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 첫걸음 뗀 핵 협상, 지금부터가 중요하다**(한겨레신문, 2009년 12월 11일 35면)

어제까지 사흘 동안 북한을 방문한 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 “이번 회담이 매우 유익했다”고 밝혔다. 북한으로부터 6자회담 복귀 확답은 받지 못했으나 쌍방은 자신이 의도한 메시지를 서로 교감할 수 있다는 판단이 선 것이다. 버락 오바마 정부 출범 이후 첫 고위급 공식 접촉인 이번 대화를 계기로 핵 문제를 근본적으로 풀기 위한 노력이 한층 속도를 낼 것으로 보인다.

미국은 북한이 제기하는 핵심 의제들을 협상 테이블에 올려 핵 문제를 진전시키겠다는 태도를 분명히 해왔으며, 대표적 사안이 바로 평화협정 체결이다. 따라서 6자회담이 재개되면 9·19 공동성명 내용 이상으로 평화협정 논의 틀이 구체화할 가능성이 커졌다. 보즈워스는 힐러리 클린턴 국무장관도 여러 차례 언급한 바 있는 평화협정 문제를 미국이 직접 제시할 의향을 내비쳤다. 따라서 6자회담이 재개되면 9·19 공동성명 내용 이상으로 평화협정 논의 틀이 구체화할 가능성이 커졌다.

북한이 평화협정 문제를 강조하는 주된 이유는 미국 등의 정권이 바뀌더라도 체제 안전을 보장받으려는 데 있다. 오바마 정부는 지난 10여년간 진퇴를 거듭한 핵 협상 과정을 볼 때 북한의 이런 요구가 나름의 근거를 갖는다고 인정한다.

이제 미국의 협상 의지를 확인한 이상 북한이 결단을 내릴 차례다. 무엇보다 6자회담 복귀를 더 미룰 이유가 없다. 평화협정이든 관계정상화든 경제지원이든 회담이 재개돼야 본격적으로 논의할 수 있다.

우리나라는 핵 협상 국면에서 역할을 키울 수 있도록 정책을 다시 설정해야 한다. 지금까지 정부는 대북 압박론의 편에서 대북 대화 속도를 늦추는 데 치중했다. 남북관계 역시 선핵폐기론에 밀려 답보상태에 머문다. 이런 태도는 북한이 선택할 수 있는 여지를 좁혀 핵 문제 해결을 어렵게 만들고 남북 사이의 갈등만 불러올 뿐이다.

이제 핵 협상을 적극 뒷받침하고 남북관계와 핵 문제의 선순환 구조를 만들어야 한다. 우선 금강산·개성 관광과 인도적 지원 등 현안을 빨리 해결하고 남북 고위급 대화 통로를 상설화할 필요가 있다.

지금 6자회담 참가국들은 본격적인 핵 협상을 향해 차분하면서도 분명하게 앞으로 나아가고 있다. 이런 흐름이 제대로 형태를 갖추고 실질적 성과를 내도록 하려면 우리 정부의 전향적인 노력이 필수적이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 보즈워스 방북결과 실망스럽지만**(한국일보, 12월 10일 39면)

2박 3일간 평양을 방문하고 어제 서울로 귀환한 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표의 방북결과가 다소 실망스럽다. 그는 기자회견에서 "6자회담 재개의 필요성과 역할, 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행의 중요성에 대해 어느 정도 공통의 이해에 도달했다"고 밝혔다. 그러나 "북한이 언제 어떤 방식으로 6자회담에 복귀할지는 좀더 두고 봐야 하며 6자회담 당사자간 추가 논의가 필요하다"고 말했다. 북한으로부터 6자회담 복귀에 대한 확답을 얻어내지 못했다는 뜻이다. "이번 방문이 매우 유익했다"는 말이 공허하게 들리는 이유다.

물론 보즈워스 특별대표의 이번 방북 한 번으로 문제가 풀릴 것이라고 기대하기는 힘들었다. 북한이 선 평화협정 체결 등 현 단계에서 미국이 수용하기 어려운 요구조건을 내건 반면

미국은 협상이 아니라 6자회담 복귀와 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행 촉구로 양자회담의 성격을 제한한 탓이다. 다만 극적인 의견 접근으로 6자회담 재개 등의 돌파구가 열리지 않나 하는 기대도 없지 않았지만 "역시나"로 끝나고 말았다. 추후 대화 일정도 합의를 이루지 못했다.

그러나 그의 이번 방북이 전혀 무의미했다고 생각하지는 않는다. 무엇보다 양측이 6자회담의 존재 근거인 9ㆍ19공동성명 이행의 중요성에 대해 공감대를 가졌다는 것은 6자회담 복원 가능성에서 진일보를 뜻한다. 보즈워스 특별대표의 말대로 북측 관계자들과 "솔직하고 진지하게 의견을 나눴다"면 양측간 신뢰도 더 깊어졌을 것이다. 이를 발판 삼아 뉴욕채널이나 추후 대화를 통해 이른 시일 내에 6자회담 재개에 합의할 수 있기를 기대한다.

북한이 강력히 요구하는 평화협정 체결도 결국은 6자회담 틀에서 논의할 사안이며 9ㆍ19공동성명에 이미 포함되어 있는 내용이다. 그럼에도 북한이 6자회담 복귀를 미루고 선 평화협정 체결을 고집한다면 다른 의도가 있다고 의심하지 않을 수 없다. 6자회담 관련국들도 북한의 6자회담 조속한 복귀를 위해 정전협정의 평화협정 대체 등 한반도 평화체제 구축에 더 관심을 기울일 필요가 있다.

**[사설]6자회담 재개 늦어질수록 北의 고통 커진다**(동아일보, 2009년 12월 11일, 35면)

미국의 버락 오바마 행정부 출범 이후 처음으로 북-미 회담이 열렸지만 북한은 끝내 6자회담 복귀 약속을 하지 않았다. 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책특별대표는 2박 3일간 평양에 머무는 동안 강석주 외무성 제1부상과 김계관 부상을 만나는 데 그쳤다. 보즈워스 대표는 어제 서울에서 열린 기자회견에서 김정일 국방위원장 면담 요청을 하지도 않았으며 오바마 대통령이 김 위원장에게 보내는 친서도 없었다고 밝혔다. 양측이 실무 수준에서 하고 싶은 얘기를 교환한 탐색전 차원의 대화였던 셈이다.

보즈워스 대표는 북-미 양측이 “6자회담의 필요성과 역할, 2005년 9·19공동성명 이행의 중요성에 대해 공통의 이해에 도달했다”고 말했다. 나름대로 의미가 있었다는 설명이다. 6자회담은 죽었다고 하던 북한이 회담의 필요성을 인정하고, 모든 핵무기와 핵 계획을 포기하기로 약속한 9·19공동성명의 이행을 언급한 것은 고무적이지만 북한이 변할 것이라고 속단하기는 이르다. 미국은 “북한이 6자회담에 복귀한다고 해서 보상은 하지 않겠다”고 거듭 강조했다. 명시적으로 6자회담 복귀를 약속하지 않은 북한에 대해 성급하게 후한 평가를 할 수는 없다.

굳이 이번 회담의 성과를 꼽자면 미국과 북한이 처음으로 속마음을 교환한 것 정도이다. 북한은 대화 가능성을 언급하며 벼랑 끝 전술로 사태를 계속 악화시키지는 않겠다는 뜻을 내비쳤다. 보즈워스 대표도 “이번 회담이 매우 유용했다”고 강조했다. 미국도 북한의 속셈과 향후 전략을 판단할 수 있는 직접 정보를 얻은 것은 소득이라고 할 수 있다. 정부 당국자는 이번 회담이 성공도 아니지만 실패도 아니라고 중립적으로 평가했다.

보즈워스 대표는 한국 정부에 회담 결과를 설명한 데 이어 오늘부터 중국 일본 러시아를 차례로 방문해 북한과의 대화내용을 전하고 향후 대책을 논의할 예정이다. 북-미 대화의 결과를 평가하고 앞으로 어떤 대응을 할 것인지를 결정하는 중요한 후속 협의가 계속된다.

김 위원장은 북-미 접촉 결과를 보고 6자회담 참여 여부를 결정하겠다고 밝힌 바 있다. 북한이 미국에 6자회담의 필요성을 인정했다면 시간을 끌 이유가 없다. 북한의 6자회담 복귀가 늦어질수록 유엔의 대북 제재로 인한 고통이 커질 수밖에 없다. 오바마 대통령이 보즈워스 대표를 통해 전한 대로 북한이 핵을 포기하면 지금까지와는 다른 미래를 갖게 된다. 6자회담 복귀는 그 길로 가는 출발점이다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1941.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001941 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 11, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, JoongAng Ilbo, Dong-a Ilbo, All TVs 
Foreign Language High Schools Get Handed New Rules; 
Must Trim Class Sizes, Adopt Admissions Officer System and Reflect 
Only English Scores in Screening Process 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Bosworth Says U.S., N. Korea Reach Common Understanding 
to Resume Six-Party Talks and Implement 
September 19 Joint Statement 
 
Segye Ilbo 
ROK's Economic Growth Expected to Hit 5 Percent Next Year 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
ROKG to Create 200,000 More Jobs Next Year 
 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------- 
 
North Korea yesterday accepted the ROKG's offer of antiviral drugs 
aimed at helping the North deal with H1N1 flu. The ROKG plans to 
provide antiviral drugs for about 500,000 people to the North. 
(All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Stephen Bosworth, the U.S. Special Representative for North Korea 
Policy, told reporters after returning to Seoul yesterday from his 
three-day trip to Pyongyang that the U.S. and North Korea reached a 
common understanding on the need to resume the Six-Party Talks. 
(All) 
 
Ambassador Bosworth, however, said that it remains to be seen when 
or how the North will return to the Six-Party Talks, adding, "This 
is something that will require further consultations among all six 
of us." (All) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea: Ambassador Bosworth's Visit 
-------------------------------------- 
Coverage of yesterday's press remarks in Seoul by U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth was 
extensive, with most newspapers offering front-page articles about 
his three-day visit to North Korea. 
 
Coverage highlighted Ambassador Bosworth's statements: "We 
identified some common understandings on the need for, and the role 
of, the Six-Party Talks and the importance of implementation of the 
2005 Joint Statement;" "It remains to be seen when and how the DPRK 
(North Korea) will return to the Six-Party Talks;" "We did not ask 
for, nor did we meet with, Chairman Kim Jong-il;" "These (meetings) 
were exploratory talks, not negotiations;" and "As for a message to 
the North Koreans from President Obama, in effect, I am the 
message." 
 
Most media expected further U.S.-North Korea talks to come after 
consultations among the five members of the Six-Party Talks 
excluding North Korea. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo viewed this visit to Pyongyang by 
Ambassador Bosworth as successful in maintaining the momentum of 
dialogue, and observed in an editorial: "(Ambassador Bosworth's 
 
SEOUL 00001941  002 OF 005 
 
 
remarks) mean that there will be difficult diplomatic negotiations 
between the North and the other parties of the Six-Party Talks 
before the multilateral talks actually resume." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized: "We cannot give good marks 
to North Korea, which did not clearly promise to return to the 
Six-Party Talks.  If we must talk about the achievement of this 
dialogue, it seems to be that the U.S. and North Korea exchanged 
their true intentions for the first time. ...  If North Korea 
acknowledged the need for the Six-Party Talks, it has no reason to 
drag its feet.  The later the North rejoins the Six-Party Talks, the 
harsher the suffering caused by the UN sanctions." 
 
An editorial in moderate Hankook Ilbo stated: "We don't think that 
Ambassador Bosworth's visit to North Korea was meaningless.  The 
fact that the two sides have shared the importance of implementing 
the September 19 Joint Statement, which provides the raison d'tre 
of the Six-Party Talks, represents a great step forward toward 
restarting the Six-Party Talks.  As Ambassador Bosworth put it, if 
the two sides had candid and sincere talks, their mutual trust could 
also be deepened further.  We hope that this (momentum) will lead 
the U.S. and North Korea to reach an agreement to resume the 
Six-Party Talks as early as possible through ... further dialogue." 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun editorialized: "Since the U.S. has 
demonstrated its determination for negotiations, it is North Korea's 
turn to make a decision.  More than anything else, there is no 
reason for the North to delay its return to the Six-Party Talks. 
Any issues of concern - whether it is a peace treaty, normalization 
of ties or economic aid - can be discussed only when the Six-Party 
Talks resume." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
WHAT NEXT IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH N. KOREA? 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 11, 2009, Page 35) 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
returned empty-handed from a three-day visit to North Korea.  But he 
said he had "extensive and useful talks" with North Korea's Vice 
Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju, identifying "some common ground" on 
the need for and the role of the Six-Party Talks and the importance 
of the implementation of the 2005 statement of principles. 
 
However, Bosworth said it remains to be seen when and how North 
Korea will return to the Six-Party Talks, and that further 
negotiations would be necessary with the ROK, China, Japan and 
Russia.  In other words, tough negotiations remain. 
 
Regarding North Korea's demand for Washington to sign a peace treaty 
to replace the armistice that halted the Korean War, Bosworth said 
all of the participants are ready to discuss a peace regime once the 
Six-Party Talks resume.  The September 19 statement of principles 
adopted during the Six-Party Talks back in 2005 stipulates that 
negotiations will take place over a permanent peace framework on the 
Korean Peninsula.  The offer by the U.S. does therefore not go 
beyond the parameters of the terms agreed so far. 
 
North Korea will try to use the peace treaty as a reason for 
returning to the Six-Party Talks, and once the negotiations resume, 
the North could even demand a withdrawal of U.S. troops from the 
ROK.  A peace treaty should be discussed between the ROK and North 
Korea, with the U.S. and China playing supporting roles.  Seoul must 
come up with compelling logic to convince the U.S., China, Japan and 
Russia (to take supporting roles, instead of lead roles, with 
respect to a peace treaty) and map out precautionary measures. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
LEE ADMINISTRATION MUST TAKE FIRST STEP TOWARDS DIALOGUE WITH N. 
 
SEOUL 00001941  003 OF 005 
 
 
KOREA 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, December 11, 2009, Page 35) 
 
Steven Bosworth, U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy, 
made the statement, "Talks in North Korea have been worthwhile" on 
Thursday after completing his three-day visit to North Korea.  This 
statement can be interpreted to mean that although Bosworth did not 
obtain North Korea's pledge to return to the Six-Party Talks, he 
believes that both the U.S. and North Korea felt that they were able 
to communicate their intended messages to each other.  It also seems 
from what was the first official meeting of high-ranking officials 
between the U.S. and North Korea since Barack Obama's inauguration 
that both sides are committed to increasing their efforts to resolve 
the North Korea nuclear issue. 
 
The U.S. has clearly shown its commitment to resolving the core 
problems that North Korea has discussed at the negotiation tables. 
Representative examples are the matter of the peace agreement and 
building a peace system.  Bosworth explained the U.S. intention to 
directly present the peace agreement that U.S. Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton has made reference to several times.  Accordingly, 
there is a high possibility that if the Six-Party Talks restart, the 
framework for a peace agreement more concrete than the September 19, 
2005 Joint Statement could be made.  The six parties could 
immediately begin to work on peace agreement negotiations. 
 
The reason why North Korea has been emphasizing the peace agreement 
is that it wants to receive a security guarantee from the U.S. that 
would carry over in the event of a transition in administrations. 
The Obama Administration seems to recognize that request in light of 
the fact that the nuclear negotiations have been so full of twists 
and turns. 
 
Since the U.S. has demonstrated its determination for negotiations, 
it is North Korea's turn to make a decision.  More than anything 
else, there is no reason for the North to delay its return to the 
Six-Party Talks.  Any issues of concern - whether it is a peace 
treaty, normalization of ties or economic aid - can be discussed 
only when the Six-Party Talks resume. 
 
The Lee Administration should reset its North Korea policy in order 
to increase its role in negotiations on denuclearization of the 
peninsula.  Up until now, the Lee Administration has put weight on a 
policy of pressure that has slowed down any progress towards 
dialogue.  Moreover, inter-Korean relations have been in a stalemate 
as a result of insisting on denuclearization as a prerequisite for 
dialogue.  This kind of attitude from the Lee Administration makes 
the nuclear issue much more difficult to resolve in that it also has 
narrowed North Korea's options. 
 
From this point forward, the Lee Administration should enact a 
policy that supports nuclear negotiations and a positive circle of 
communication surrounding inter-Korean relations and the North Korea 
nuclear issue.  Above all, the ROKG should resolve the issues 
concerning the resumption of the Mt. Kumgang and Kaesong tourism 
projects as soon as possible and secure a channel of communication 
between high-ranking officials of both countries. 
 
Presently, other participants in the Six-Party Talks are moving 
towards earnest nuclear negotiations in a calm but clear manner.  It 
is essential for the Lee Administration to make a sincere 
contribution now in order to bear the fruits that could come from 
the current situation. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
EVEN THOUGH OUTCOME OF BOSWORTH'S N. KOREA VISIT IS DISAPPOINTING 
(Hankook Ilbo, December 11, Page 39) 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
returned to Seoul yesterday after his three-day visit to Pyongyang. 
But the outcome of his visit seems disappointing.  At a press 
 
SEOUL 00001941  004 OF 005 
 
 
conference, Ambassador Bosworth said, "We identified some common 
understandings on the need for, and the role of, the Six-Party Talks 
and the importance of implementation of the 2005 Joint Statement." 
He added, however, "It remains to be seen when and how the DPRK 
(North Korea) will return to the Six-Party Talks."  This shows that 
he didn't receive assurances from North Korea that it will return to 
the Six-Party Talks.  That is why his remarks that this visit was 
very useful sound quite hollow. 
 
Of course, we did not expect that his visit would lead to an 
immediate resolution of the North Korean (nuclear) issue.  The North 
demanded a peace treaty (with the U.S.), which the U.S. is unlikely 
to accept, as a precondition (for returning to the Six-Party Talks.) 
 Meanwhile, the U.S. wanted to limit the bilateral talks to a 
discussion of the North's return to the Six-Party Talks  and the 
implementation of the September 19 Joint Statement.  Still, we 
considered the possibility that both sides might reach an agreement 
dramatically and achieve a breakthrough in resuming the Six-Party 
Talks.  However, this did not happen.  In addition, the U.S. and 
North Korea did not agree on the schedule of their future talks. 
 
But we don't think that Ambassador Bosworth's visit to North Korea 
was meaningless.  The fact that the two sides shared the importance 
of implementing the September 19 Joint Statement, which provides the 
raison d'tre of the Six-Party Talks, represents a great step 
forward toward restarting the Six-Party Talks.  As Ambassador 
Bosworth put it, if the two sides had candid and sincere talks, 
their mutual trust could also be deepened further.  We hope that 
this (momentum) will lead the U.S. and North Korea to reach an 
agreement to resume the Six-Party Talks as early as possible through 
a New York channel or further dialogue. 
 
A peace treaty, which North Korea strongly demands, should be 
discussed within the framework of the Six-Party Talks because it is 
stipulated in the September 19 Joint Statement.  If North Korea 
insists on signing a peace treaty (with the U.S.) without pledging 
to return to the Six-Party Talks, we cannot but suspect that the 
North has ulterior motives.  Six-Party countries need to pay more 
attention to establishing a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula in 
order to bring North Korea back to the Six-Party Talks. 
 
 
DELAYED RESUMPTION OF SIX-PARTY TALKS WILL INCREASE N. KOREA'S 
SUFFERING 
(Dong-a Ilbo, December 11, 2009, Page 35) 
 
The U.S.-North Korea dialogue was held for the first time since the 
launch of the Barack Obama Administration, but, in the end, the 
North did not promise to return to the Six-Party Talks.  During his 
three-day two-night stay in Pyongyang, U.S. Special Representative 
for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth only met with North Korea's 
First Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok-ju and Chief Nuclear Envoy Kim 
Kye-gwan.  Ambassador Bosworth said at yesterday's press conference 
in Seoul that he did not request a meeting with North Korean leader 
Kim Jong-il, nor did he carry President Obama's personal letter for 
Kim.  In other words, it was a working-level dialogue where both 
sides exchanged what they wanted to say. 
 
Ambassador Bosworth said, "(The U.S. and North Korea) identified 
some common understandings on the need for and the role of the 
Six-Party Talks and the importance of the implementation of the 2005 
Joint Statement."  He indicated that the dialogue was meaningful. 
Although it is encouraging that the North, which had declared the 
Six-Party Talks dead, acknowledged the need for the multilateral 
talks and mentioned the implementation of the September 19, 2005 
Joint Statement, it is too early to say that North Korea will 
change.  The U.S. repeatedly emphasized that it would not reward 
North Korea simply for returning to the Six-Party Talks.  We cannot 
give good marks to North Korea, which did not clearly promise to 
return to the Six-Party Talks. 
 
If we must talk about the achievement of this dialogue, it seems to 
be that the U.S. and North Korea exchanged their true intentions for 
the first time.  While mentioning the possibility of dialogue, North 
 
SEOUL 00001941  005 OF 005 
 
 
Korea hinted that it would not continuously aggravate the situation 
with its brinkmanship tactics.  Ambassador Bosworth also stressed 
that he had "very useful" talks in North Korea.  The talks can be 
said to be beneficial to the U.S., too, since it obtained direct 
information on the North, based on which Washington can judge North 
Korea's intention and future strategy.  An ROKG official took a 
neutral view of the dialogue, saying that it was neither a success 
nor a failure. 
 
Following his briefing to the ROKG, Ambassador Bosworth will visit 
China, Japan, and Russia starting today to explain the results of 
the meeting with the North and discuss future measures.  Follow-up 
consultations will continue to assess the outcome of the U.S.-North 
Korea dialogue and determine how to respond (to the North Korean 
issue). 
 
North Korean leader Kim has said that he would decide whether to 
participate in the Six-Party Talks, depending on the outcome of the 
U.S.-North Korea contact.  If North Korea acknowledged the need for 
the Six-Party Talks, it has no reason to drag its feet.  The later 
the North rejoins the Six-Party Talks, the harsher the suffering 
caused by the UN sanctions.  As President Obama said to the North 
through Ambassador Bosworth, if the North abandons its nuclear 
ambitions, it will have a different future.  A return to the 
Six-Party Talks is the starting point of that road. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>