^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL826  |  2009-05-26 07:31  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론보도 2009년 5월 26일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 14 SEOUL 000826

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론보도 2009년 5월 26일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명)  --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2015/08/17 16:15//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

모든 신문과 텔레비전
북, 2차 핵실험·미사일 3발도 발사
===== 국내 동향 =====

조선중앙통신은 이날 오전 5시57분 김 위원장이 “노무현 전 대통령이 불상사로 서거하였다는 소식에 접하여 권양숙 여사와 유가족들에게 심심한 애도의 뜻을 표합니다”라는 내용의 조전을 보냈다고 보도했다. 이는 북한이 두 번째 핵실험 실시를 몇 시간 앞둔 시점에 이뤄졌다. (모든 신문과 텔레비전)

캐슬린 스티븐스 주한 미국 대사는 어제 분양소를 방문해 노무현 전 대통령에 대한 애도의 뜻을 표했다. (조선)

보건 당국은 외국인 영어 교사 그룹 이외에도 신종플루 바이러스에 양성 반응을 보이는 신종플루 감염 케이스 14명이 추가로 확인되었다고 5월 25일 말했다. 어제 부로 한국에서 신종플루에 감염된 사람은 총 22명이다 (모든 신문과 텔레비전)
===== 국제 동향 =====

북한은 조선중앙통신사 보도를 통해 "공화국의 자위적 핵억제력을 백방으로 강화하기 위한 조치의 일환으로 (주체 98(2009)년 5월25일) 또 한 차례의 지하 핵시험을 성과적으로 진행했다"고 밝혔다. 중앙통신은 "이번 핵시험은 폭발력과 조종 기술에 있어서 새로운 높은 단계에서 안전하게 진행됐다"고 주장했다. (모든 신문과 텔레비전)

한국 청와대 비서실은 북한이 동해 해안가 발사장에서 지대공 단거리 미사일 3발도 발사했다고 전했다. (모든 신문과 텔레비전)

이명박 대통령은 북한의 지하 핵실험에 대응하기 위해 긴급 국가안전보장회의를 주재하였다. 한국 사람들은 "비핵화 공동선언과 6자회담 합의 의무를 저버리는 것이며 추가 핵실험을 금지한 유엔 안보리 결의 1718호에 대한 명백한 위반으로 결코 용납할 수 없는 도발행위"라고 규탄했다. (모든 신문과 텔레비전)

오바마 미 대통령은 북한의 핵실험이 국제 평화에 위협이라며 국제사회가 대응에 나서야 한다고 말했다. 일본과 유럽연합도 북한의 핵실험을 유엔 제재 조치 위반으로 규탄했다. 중국 외무부도 북한의 핵실험을 강력히 규탄하는 성명을 발표했다. (모든 신문과 텔레비전)

러시아 국방부는 북한의 2차 핵실험 폭발력이 1차 때보다 훨씬 강력한 20kt(1kt는 TNT 폭약 1000t의 폭발력)에 달하는 것으로 보고 있다고 이날 이타르타스 통신 등이 보도했다. (모든 신문과 텔레비전)
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====
핵실험

한국의 모든 미디어는 5월 25일 북한이 단행한 두 번째 핵실험에 대해 대대적으로 보도하였다. 한국 미디어는 북한 지도자 김정일이 노무현 전 대통령이 토요일에 서거했다는 비보에 애도를 표명한 지 불과 몇 시간 만에 북한의 핵실험을 단행했다고 언급했다.

중도 우파 중앙일보의 칼럼리스트는 내부 지면 분석 꼭지에서 북한의 핵실험은 "체제 보장" 노력의 일환으로 핵 실험을 단행했다는 견해를 피력했다. 동 칼럼리스트(김영희)는 북한이 핵실험을 실행한 이후 북한 비핵화를 전제로 한 모든 나라의 대북정책이 파산 위기에 몰렸다고 했다.

보수 동아일보는 1면에서 북한이 핵실험 시기를 사전에 결정한 뒤 노 전 대통령 서거라는 상황을 고려하지 않고 그대로 강행했을 것이라는 관측이 많다고 보도했다. 동아는 북한이 미국 현충일인 ‘메모리얼 데이’(5월 마지막 주 월요일)를 D데이로 택했다는 분석도 있다고 한다.

동아는 북한은 핵개발을 (미국의 핵 위협에 대응하기 위한) "자위적 핵 억제력 강화”하기 위해 북한이 핵실험을 단행했다고 언급했다. 동아일보는 남한 내부의 반북 여론을 고조시켜 이명박 정부의 대북정책에 힘을 실어주는 결과를 낳을 수도 있다고 했다.

동아일보는 러시아 국방부가 이번 핵실험의 폭발력이 최고 20kt으로 2006년 핵실험보다 20배 큰 것으로 파악했다고 언급했다.

중도 한국일보는 북한이 대미 협상력을 강화하고 미국을 압박하기 위해 두 번째 핵실험을 단행했다는 다수의 관측통의 판단을 전했다. 그 밖에 관측통들은 북한의 2006년 첫 핵실험에 이어 핵무기를 기술적으로 개선하고 북한의 핵 프로그램 완성도를 높이기 위한 후속 조치라고 판단한다고 했다.

대다수 한국 미디는 북한의 핵실험에 대한 국제 사회의 강한 반발을 보도했다. 보수 조선일보는 북한의 핵실험이 국제 평화에 위협이며 국제사회가 대응에 나서야 한다는 오바마 미 대통령의 발언을 전했다. 조선일보는 일본과 유럽연합도 북한의 핵실험을 유엔 제재 조치 위반으로 규탄했다고 전했다. 중국 외무부도 북한의 핵실험을 강력히 규탄하는 성명을 발표했다.

대다수 한국 미디어의 관련 소식으로는 북한이 동해 해안가 발사장에서 지대공 단거리 미사일 3발도 발사했다는 한국 청와대 비서실의 발언도 전했다.

중앙일보 사설: "‘핵 보유국 북한’이 던지는 안보 파장은 태풍급이다. 시급하게 우리의 안보 대비책을 전면 재정비해야 한다. 우리의 재래식 무기가 아무리 북한을 압도하더라도 핵무기에는 속수무책일 뿐이다. 당장 우리가 핵무기를 가질 여건이 아니므로 미국의 핵우산에 철저히 의지할 수밖에 없다."

조선일보 사설: "대한민국은 북한이 핵과 ICBM을 보유하는 사태로 가장 절박한 위협을 당하고 있으면서도 '핵확산금지조약'(NPT)과 '미사일기술통제체제'(MTCR) 및 한·미 미사일 양해 각서 등에 손발이 묶여 북한의 핵과 미사일 위협에 대한 실질적 대응 조치를 취할 길이 봉쇄돼 있다. …지금 대한민국은 북한의 핵과 미사일 위협 아래서 바로 '자위를 위한 억지력'을 필요로 하고 있다."

한겨레신문 사설: "버락 오바마 미국 정부는 대북 포괄적 직접협상이라는 큰 틀을 잡아놓고도 구체적 방안 마련에서 늑장을 부렸다. …미국의 안이한 태도가 상황 악화에 일조한 건 사실이다. …특히 미국 정부 안팎의 여러 인사들은 (‘북한이 카드를 다 쓰고 나면 대화에 나설 것’이라는) 이른바 ‘선의의 무시’ 태도를 보였다. 핵실험을 막으려 하지 않고 기정사실화한 것이다."
===== 사설/논단 =====

**[문창극 칼럼] 공인의 죽음(중앙일보, 5월 26일 43면)**
문창극 대기자

…(상략) 나는 그의 마음을 이해할 수는 있지만 그의 선택이 옳았다고 생각지 않는다. 사람들은 누구나 살다가 막다른 골목에 부딪히는 경험을 한다. 죽음으로 모든 고통에서 벗어나고 싶은 유혹을 느낄 수도 있다. 그러나 보통 사람들은 ‘죽고 싶어도 죽을 수 없다’는 말을 한다. 부모님 때문에, 처자식 때문에, 하던 일 때문에…. 나 아닌 남에 대한 책임감이, 또는 사랑이 죽고 싶은 감정을 누르는 것이다. 국가 지도자라면 그런 식의 죽음이 끼칠 영향을 조금이라도 생각했어야 하지 않을까. 죽으려는 사람이 무슨 생각이 있었겠느냐고 말할 수도 있다. 그러나 재임기간 중에도 그의 약점은 바로 그런 것이었다. 대통령을 지냈다는 대표성과 엄중함에 왜 의식이 미치지 못했을까. 그가 유언에서 ‘나는 대통령으로서 명예를 지키지 못해 이렇게 생을 마감한다. 그러나 나의 죽음으로 나라가 분열을 넘어 새 길을 가기 바란다’고 했다면 어땠을까. 그렇지 않아도 세계 최대의 자살국이라는 오명을 쓰고 있는 이 나라에서 대통령을 지낸 사람까지 이런 식으로 생을 마감한다면 그 영향이 어떻겠는가.

죽음이 모든 것을 덮는다고 하지만 그의 죽음은 자연인과 공인의 성격으로 나누어 판단해야 한다. 자연인으로서 가슴 아프고 안타깝지만 공인으로서 그의 행동은 적절치 못했다. 그 점이 그의 장례절차나 사후 문제에도 반영되어야 했다. 검찰의 처리도 문제다. 그가 큰 범죄자인 양 몰아붙이다가 그가 죽자마자 “모든 수사는 종결된다”고 했다. 당사자가 죽음으로써 자연스럽게 공소권이 상실된다고는 하지만 그렇다고 범죄가 없어지는 것은 아니다. 죽은 그를 괴롭히자는 얘기가 아니다. 사실은 무엇인지, 검찰의 억지는 없었는지가 밝혀져야 한다. 정치가 어려워질 것이라는 변명과 분위기에 흔들리는 것이 바로 정치 검찰임을 스스로 말해 주는 것이다. 경호실도 마찬가지다. 당연히 이런 일까지도 예상하고 경호에 만전을 기해야 했다. 우리는 퇴임 대통령 하나를 보호하지 못하는 불명예스러운 나라가 되었다. 죽음이 안타까운 것과 나라가 나라로서 틀을 지켜가는 것과는 별개의 문제다.

…(중략) 죽음의 의미는 죽은 당사자가 아니라 살아남은 자들에 의해 어떻게 받아들여지느냐에 따라 달라진다. 노 전 대통령의 죽음을 우리가 어떻게 받아들이느냐에 따라 그의 죽음의 의미는 달라지는 것이다. 그런 점에서 나는 그의 죽음으로 우리의 분열을 끝내자고 제안한다. 이제 서로의 미움을 털어내자. 지난 10년의 갈등을 그의 죽음으로써 종지부를 찍자. 특히 그를 사랑하는 사람들이라면 그의 죽음을 의미 있게 만들 의무가 있지 않겠는가.

**[사설]國民葬엄수되도록 각계 협조를(동아일보, 2009년 5월 25일 31면)**

노무현 전 대통령의 장례가 7일간의 국민장으로 결정됐다. 정부가 유족 측에 국민장을 제의한 것은 노 전 대통령의 서거를 국민화합의 계기로 승화시키자는 뜻을 담은 것으로 볼 수 있다. 당초 가족장을 원했던 유족과 노 전 대통령 측근들이 이를 받아들인 것도 그런 취지와 무관하지 않다고 본다.

그렇다면 노 전 대통령을 지지했던 국민이건 지지하지 않았던 국민이건 이런 뜻을 헤아려 국민장이 무사히 엄수(嚴修)되도록 하고, 이것이 국가사회의 안정으로 이어지도록 서로 협조해야 한다. 그러는 것이 고인과 유족에 대한 예의일 뿐만 아니라 성숙한 국민의 모습이기도 하다. 

그런 점에서 경남 김해시 봉하마을 빈소 주변에서 일부 지지자들이 보이는 과격한 행동은 자제돼야 한다. 한승수 국무총리는 정부를 대표해 조문하려다 이들에 의해 가로막혔다. 김형오 국회의장과 이회창 자유선진당 총재는 조문은커녕 물벼락이나 계란세례를 받았다. 박근혜 한나라당 전 대표도 헛걸음을 했고, 열린우리당 대선 후보였던 정동영 의원마저도 첫날 조문을 저지당했다. 이명박 대통령과 전두환 전 대통령, 박희태 한나라당 대표가 보낸 조화도 짓밟혔다. 문명국가, 성숙된 사회, 선진화를 지향하는 나라에서 조문객을 축객(逐客)하고 조화에 발길질하는 해괴한 일이 벌어진다는 사실이 믿기지 않을 정도다. 고인을 욕되게 하는 일이기도 하다. 

일부 누리꾼이 인터넷 포털사이트의 추모게시판 등을 이용해 ‘정치적 타살’이니, ‘제2의 촛불’이니 운운하면서 자극적이고 선동적인 분위기를 부추기는 것도 옳지 않다. 지각 있는 국민이라면 전직 대통령의 서거를 사회혼란 조성의 기회로 삼으려는 불순한 의도에 공감하지 않을 뿐 아니라 개탄할 것이다. 일부 세력이 각계의 조의(弔意)를 왜곡해 또다시 편을 가르고 정치사회적 갈등을 증폭시키려 한다면 다수 국민의 분노를 자아낼 수도 있다. 노 전 대통령이 유서에서 ‘누구도 원망하지 마라’고 했듯이, 진정 고인을 생각하는 사람들이라면 흥분하기보다 차분하고 이성적인 모습을 보여야 한다.

국민 통합을 이끌어야 할 정치가 오히려 국민 분열을 조장해서도 안 되고, 일부 사회세력이 이를 부추겨서도 안 된다. 김수한 전 국회의장은 “한 나라의 국민 수준은 그 나라의 정치 수준 그 이상도 이하도 아니다”면서 “남을 탓하지 말고 서로 자기를 돌아보면서 반성해야 한다”고 말했다. 노 전 대통령의 죽음을 갈등과 분열이 아닌, 화합과 통합의 계기로 만들어가야 할 일차적인 책임은 정치권에 있다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**국민적 화합을 위한 순간(중앙일보 2009년 5월 25일 42면)**

대한민국 16대 대통령의 비극적인 서거를 애도하는 국민의 조문이 이어지고 있다. 노무현 전 대통령의 시신이 안치된 고향 봉하마을에선 장삼이사(張三李四) 국민이 2㎞ 이상을 걸어 문상(問喪)하고 있다. 서울 중심가의 분향소에도 밤 늦게까지 사람들이 조문하고 있다. 어제는 전국의 교회·성당·사찰에서 많은 국민이 노 전 대통령의 안식과 유가족의 안녕을 기원했다. 조문에는 남녀노소, 신분의 고하, 여야, 보수·진보, 친노·비노가 따로 없다. 전 국민이 애도하고 있는 것이다.

노 전 대통령의 재임 중 대표적인 정적(政敵)은 박근혜 당시 한나라당 대표였다. 그의 지지 모임인 박사모는 회장 성명에서 “이념과 노선이 달라 임기 내내 (노 전 대통령과) 투쟁했지만 긴 역사의 시각으로 볼 때 나름대로 큰 존재 의미가 있었던 대통령”이라고 추모했다. 이명박 대통령도 봉하마을의 빈소를 직접 찾을 것이라고 한다. 7일간의 국민장이 지나면 노 전 대통령은 본인의 유언대로 고향에 묻힐 것이다.

노 전 대통령의 투신은 필설로 표현하기 어려운 충격적인 사건이다. 거듭 지적하지만 세계사에서도 유례를 찾기 힘들다. 더군다나 지금은 많은 국민이 경제위기의 한복판에서 하루하루 힘든 생계를 이어가는 상황이다. 그리고 남북관계 경색을 비롯해 노사갈등, 비정규직 문제, 여야의 입법전쟁, 강경노조의 물리적 투쟁 등 사회 여러 부문에서 갈등이 분출되는 혼란스러운 상황이다.

그렇지 않아도 많은 이가 불안하고 가슴에 썰렁한 바람이 부는 와중에 1년여 전까지 국가를 책임졌던 전직 국가원수가 스스로 목숨을 끊었으니 보통의 충격과 우려가 아닌 것이다.

한국 사회가 이번 사건을 슬기롭게 마무리 짓고 안정과 발전을 다져나가는 것은 역사의 전진을 위해 매우 중요하다. 우선 우리 사회는 유족의 아픔을 달래고 최대의 예우를 갖춰 노 전 대통령을 안장(安葬)해야 한다. 그러곤 그가 남긴 공과(功過)의 유산을 차분하게 정리해, 이어갈 것은 이어가고 고칠 것은 고쳐나가야 한다. 그것이 역사의 계승이며 사회의 연속성이다. 

갈등이 엄연히 존재하는 상황에서 이런 지난한 작업을 제대로 해내려면 가장 중요한 것이 차분함과 냉정이다. 노 전 대통령은 “아무도 원망하지 마라”는 유서를 남겼다. 노 전 대통령과 정치적 입장을 달리했다고 해서, 구체적인 정책과 사안에서 격렬하게 맞붙었다고 해서 특정 세력이나 인물을 이런 전(全) 사회적인 작업에서 배제한다면 이는 화합과 전진에 반하는 것이다.

분명한 근거 없이 ‘검찰 책임론’을 몰아붙이거나, 책임지는 사람이 있어야 한다고 주장하는 건 갈등을 부추기는 것이다. 정당했던 언론의 비판을 감정적으로 매도하는 것은 피해야 한다. 어떤 인물과 집단의 문상을 막는 것도 온당치 못하다. 서울 분향소에는 일부 시민이 거리행진을 시도하다 경찰과 충돌했는데 이는 차분한 문상이 아니다. 봉하마을의 빈소에서 대통령 조화를 훼손한 건 잘못된 것이다.

이런 사례들은 갈등의 해소에도 맞지 않거니와 노 전 대통령의 유지(遺志)와도 상충된다. 앞으로 특정 세력이 사건을 정치적으로 이용해 과격한 공세나 집회를 기획한다면 이는 매우 잘못된 처사고, 국민적 지지도 받지 못할 것이다. 많은 국민이 조문 행렬에 동참하는 건 노 전 대통령과 유가족에게 애도를 표하기 위함이지만, 동시에 사회의 갈등을 확대해선 안 된다는 조용한 의지의 표명이기도 하다.

노 전 대통령의 유가족은 정부의 국민장 제안을 받아들였다. 국민장은 말 그대로 전 국민이 슬픔을 공유하고 애도를 표하며 망자(亡者)를 편하게 보내는 것이다. 한국의 현대사에서 백범 김구 선생과 최규하 전 대통령 등이 국민장의 예우 속에서 안식을 찾아 떠났다. 국민장은 장례라는 마감이지만 화합을 위한 또 다른 시작이기도 하다. 남은 장례기간 사회 여러 세력은 이념과 정파를 떠나 ‘국가원수 노무현’이 남긴 5년을 차분하게 생각해 보는 시간을 가질 필요가 있다.

그가 고뇌 어린 죽음으로 말하려고 했던 것이 무엇인지 숙고해보자. 노 전 대통령을 잃고 한국 사회가 더욱더 갈등과 분열에 빠져든다면 전직 국가원수보다 더 큰 것을 잃는 것이다. 노 전 대통령의 충격적인 서거에 세계인이 한국을 지켜보고 있기도 하다. 한국 사회의 성숙도가 시험에 들고 있다. 성숙하고 화합적인 분위기에서, 전 국민의 진정 어린 애도 속에서 차분하게 노무현 전 대통령을 보내자.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설]처음부터 정치보복 냄새 진동했던 노무현 사건(한겨레 2009년 5월 25일 23면)**

"나로 말미암아 여러 사람이 받은 고통이 너무 크다. 앞으로 받을 고통도 헤아릴 수가 없다."

노무현 전 대통령의 유서에 나오는 이 두 줄에서 그가 퇴임 뒤에 겪어야 했던 압박과 고통이 얼마나 심했는지를 헤아려 볼 수 있다. 그 핵심엔 박연차 전 태광실업 회장과 관련한 권력비리 의혹 사건이 있다. 이 사건으로 노 전 대통령의 가족은 사실상 폐족되는 멸문지화를 당했고, 그의 옆에 있던 사람들도 덩달아 정을 맞았다.

비리가 먼저 있고 징벌이 뒤따르는 것이 상례이지만, 박씨 사건은 철저하게 그 반대 방향으로 진행됐다는 인상을 지울 수 없다. ‘노무현 제압하기’라는 목표를 정해놓고 권력기관이 거기에 십자포화를 날리는 식으로 사태가 전개된 것이다. 시중에 현 정권에 의한 ‘정치적 타살’이라는 평가가 파다한 것도 국세청과 검찰이 박씨 사건과 관련해 벌인 ‘이상한’ 행태에서 기인하는 바가 크다.

박씨 사건의 실마리가 된 것은 지난해 7월 실시된 국세청의 태광실업 특별세무조사였다. 이 조사를 담당한 곳은 부동산 투기 등 커다란 사회 현안이나 여러 업종이 교차하는 복잡한 사안을 담당하는 서울지방국세청 조사4국이다. 경남 김해시에 본사를 둔 연매출 5000억원도 되지 않는 중견회사에 유례없이 최고의 조사능력을 자랑하는 요원들을 투입한 것이다. 이를 두고 국세청 안에서조차 연임을 노리는 한상률 당시 청장이 이명박 정권에 아부를 하기 위해 ‘정치 조사’를 벌인다는 소리가 나왔다. 한 청장은 조사4국이 이 잡기 조사를 통해 포착한 노 전 대통령 쪽과 박씨 사이의 수상한 돈거래를 이 대통령에게 직접 보고했다고 한다.

이어 대검 중수부가 지난해 말 박씨 관련 수사를 시작했고, 올해 3월부턴 기존 검사 10명에 8명을 파견받아 노 전 대통령을 겨냥한 본격 수사에 돌입했다. 검찰은 외환은행 헐값 매각, 외환카드 주가 조작, 조풍언 대우 구명 로비 의혹 등 잇달아 무죄 선고를 받아 이에 대한 공소 유지를 위해 검사를 늘린 것이라고 설명했으나, 이후 수사 진행 과정에서 노 전 대통령을 잡기 위한 보강이었음이 드러났다. 환부만 정확하고 신속하게 도려내는 전통적인 특수수사 방식과는 달리, 먼지 날 때까지 터는 싹쓸이식 수사가 난무했다.

이런 점에서 노 전 대통령의 죽음은 죄보다 사람을 미워한 이명박 정권이 만들어낸 한국사 최대의 불행이라고 할 수 있다. 권력기관을 앞세운 정치보복은 노 전 대통령의 죽음을 계기로 이 땅에서 영원히 추방해야 할 과제이다.

(우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 마지막 문장을 추가하였다.)

**[사설] 노 전 대통령이 편히 잠들 수 있게 하자(조선일보, 2009년 5월 25일 35면)**

정부는 임시국무회의를 열어 노무현 전 대통령의 장례를 국민장(國民葬)으로 치르기로 했다. 장례 기간은 23일부터 29일까지 7일간이며, 영결식은 29일 거행된다. 유족들 뜻에 따라 노 전 대통령 유해는 고향인 김해 봉하마을에 안장하기로 했다. 전직 대통령의 장례를 국민장으로 치르는 것은 2006년 최규하 전 대통령에 이어 두 번째다. 이승만·윤보선 전 대통령 장례는 가족장으로 치러졌으며 현직에서 사거(死去)한 박정희 전 대통령 장례는 국장(國葬)으로 치러졌다.

봉하마을 마을회관에 마련된 분향소를 비롯해 전국의 분향소에는 노 전 대통령의 명복을 비는 조문객들의 발길이 이어지고 있다. 이명박 대통령도 봉하마을 분향소를 찾아 조문할 계획인 것으로 알려졌다. 전국의 분향소에선 대체로 차분한 분위기 속에서 조문이 이뤄지고 있지만 노 전 대통령의 일부 지지자들은 23일 봉하마을에서 이명박 대통령이 보낸 조화를 부쉈고 한승수 국무총리와 이회창 자유선진당 총재, 김형오 국회의장 등의 조문을 가로막았다. 이들은 이 총재가 탄 차를 향해 달걀과 물병을 집어던졌고, 이 총재는 결국 차에서 내리지도 못한 채 발길을 돌려야 했다. 노 전 대통령 임기 말년에 열린우리당 해체를 주장하며 노 전 대통령과 맞섰던 정동영 의원도 '배신자'라는 비난 속에 조문을 못하고 돌아갔다가 24일 다시 빈소를 찾았다.

노 전 대통령의 급작스러운 죽음에 지지자들이 충격을 받았다고는 하지만 조문하러 온 사람들에 대해 정치적 친소(親疏) 관계를 따져가며 조문을 막거나 공개적으로 망신을 주는 것은 고인의 뜻과 어긋나는 일이다. 노 전 대통령과 정치적으로 경쟁 관계에 있었거나 정치적 입장 차이 때문에 노 전 대통령과 맞섰던 사람들 역시 너무나 뜻밖의 죽음을 안타까워하며 고인의 명복을 빌러 찾아온 사람들이다.

노사모 소속 회원들은 KBS 보도 내용이 마음에 들지 않는다며 한때 KBS 중계차를 내쫓기도 하고, 기자들에게 심문하듯 소속 회사를 물으며 신분증 제시를 요구하는 것 또한 경우에 어긋난 행동이다. 노사모가 장례기간에 자원봉사 역할을 맡기로 했다면 그에 걸맞은 예의를 갖춰야 한다. 일부 분향소에서 '이명박 정부 탄핵 서명운동'을 벌이는 것 역시 조문(弔問)의 본뜻을 벗어나는 행동이다.

국민은 노 전 대통령의 급작스러운 서거를 통해 권력과 명예의 부침(浮沈)이 얼마나 허망하고 그걸 쫓으며 증오와 갈등을 엮어내는 일이 얼마나 부질없는 것인지를 절감하고 있다. 노 전 대통령 스스로도 유서에서 "삶과 죽음이 모두 자연의 한 조각 아니겠는가. 누구도 원망하지 마라"고 했다. 그런 노 전 대통령이 자신의 죽음이 또 다른 정치적 혼란이나 사회적 갈등을 부르고 국민 사이에 대립과 분열이 격화하는 계기가 되기를 원치 않았을 것이다.

노 전 대통령의 뜻밖의 죽음을 통해 한편으로 대한민국 정치가 지난 50년간 짊어지고 온 업(業)의 사슬을 여기서 반드시 끊고 말겠다는 각오를 새로이 다지면서 다른 한편으론 고인이 이 땅에서 누리지 못했던 평온한 잠의 복락(福樂)을 저세상에선 누릴 수 있도록 기구(祈求)하는 것은 남은 사람의 도리이기도 하다. 노 전 대통령 장례가 다시 편을 가르고 손가락질하는 부대낌의 장(場)이 아니라 서로 상대의 상처를 되돌아보고 그 아픔을 자신의 아픔으로 보듬는 계기가 되었으면 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] ‘핵 보유국 북한’ 대응하는 안보 대책 시급하다(중앙일보 2009년 5월 26일 42면)**

북한이 2차 핵실험을 했다. 이로써 한반도 주변의 안보 환경이 전과는 차원이 달라졌다. 지금까지 북한의 핵무기 보유를 공식 인정하지 않던 국제사회는 싫든 좋든 북한을 실질적인 핵 보유국으로 간주할 수밖에 없게 됐다. 가장 우려하던 엄중한 사태가 도래한 것이다. 특히 노무현 전 대통령 서거라는 참담하고 비통한 시기에 떨어진 날벼락이라 충격과 위기감이 이만저만 크지 않다.

북한은 지난달 장거리 로켓 발사에 대한 유엔 안전보장이사회의 비난을 ‘사죄’하지 않으면 핵실험을 강행할 것이라고 예고했었다. 국제사회의 압박이 자신들을 핵 보유국으로 몰아갔다는 식의 합리화다.

그러나 실상은 다르다. 핵무기라는 극단적 수단을 손에 넣지 않고는 질곡(桎梏)에 빠진 북한 체제를 버텨낼 수 없다고 판단한 것으로 보인다. 생존을 위한 최후 도박인 셈이다. 국제정치의 본질과 흐름에 무지한 근시안적 오판이요, 경거망동이 아닐 수 없다.

(중략)…문제는 우리다. ‘핵 보유국 북한’이 던지는 안보 파장은 태풍급이다. 시급하게 우리의 안보 대비책을 전면 재정비해야 한다. 우리의 재래식 무기가 아무리 북한을 압도하더라도 핵무기에는 속수무책일 뿐이다. 당장 우리가 핵무기를 가질 여건이 아니므로 미국의 핵우산에 철저히 의지할 수밖에 없다.

이를 위해 한·미동맹은 더욱 강화돼야 한다. 다음 달 한·미 정상회담에서 오바마 미 대통령 입으로 한국에 대한 핵우산 공약을 재확인하도록 요청해야 한다.

개성공단도 그곳에 진출한 우리 기업들과 근로자들이 남북관계의 새로운 미래를 여는 개척자가 아닌, 북한의 대남 협박에 악용되는 인질로 뒤바뀔 위험성이 커졌다. 당장 개성공단을 폐쇄하지는 않더라도 최악의 상황을 상정한 대비책을 마련해야 한다. …2차 핵실험을 강행한 마당에 북한이 핵을 포기할 가능성은 매우 희박해졌다.

그렇더라도 북한의 핵 포기는 우리로선 궁극적으로 포기할 수 없는 목표다. 북한의 핵 포기 없이 한반도에 평화 정착, 나아가 통일을 상상할 수 없기 때문이다. 따라서 북한의 핵 포기를 이끌어 내기 위한 모든 방안을 강구해야 한다.

노 전 대통령 서거와 북한 핵실험이란 이중 충격파로 자칫 사회가 큰 혼란에 빠질 수 있다. 그러나 이런 때일수록 우왕좌왕해선 안 된다. 정부도 국민도 새롭게 닥친 위기에 냉철하게 대처할 수 있도록 지혜를 모아야 할 때다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 北의 핵과 ICBM이 대한민국 위협하는 걸 방치할 순 없다(조선일보, 2009년 5월 26일 31면)**

북한은 25일 낮 12시 "또 한 차례의 지하 핵실험을 성과적으로 진행했다"(며 "폭발력과 조종기술에 있어서 새로운 높은 단계에서 안전하게 진행됐다")고 발표했다. 북한은 국제사회의 만류와 경고에도 불구하고 지난 2006년 10월 9일 1차 핵실험에 이어 기어이 2차 핵실험을 감행했다. 북한은 이날 단거리 미사일 3발을 발사하기도 했다. 북한 관영매체들은 이날 오전 6시쯤 "김정일 위원장이 노무현 전 대통령의 부인과 유족들에게 조전(弔電)을 보내 심심한 애도의 뜻을 표했다"고 보도했다.

정부는 이날 오전 9시45분쯤 함북 길주군 풍계리 인근에서 리히터 규모 4.4의 인공 지진파를 감지했다고 밝혔다. 2006년 1차 핵실험 때는 리히터 규모 3.6으로 기록됐다. 이번 핵실험의 지진파는 1차 때보다 리히터 규모로 0.8쯤 커졌고, 리히터 규모 0.8의 차이는 에너지의 강도가 20배 정도 늘어난 것을 의미한다. 한·미 당국은 1차 핵실험 때 폭발 규모가 TNT 1㏏ 수준이었던 데 비해 이번엔 최대 20㏏에 달할 것으로 추정하고 있다. 2차대전 종전을 앞둔 1945년 일본 히로시마와 나가사키에 떨어진 핵폭탄 위력은 각각 15㏏과 22㏏ 안팎이었다.

북한이 지난 4월 5일 발사한 장거리 로켓은 3200㎞를 날아갔다. 1998년 1차 발사 때의 1620㎞보다 두 배 가까이 사거리(射距離)가 늘었다. 북한은 올 들어 핵과 장거리 미사일을 과거보다 두 배 이상 성능 개량하는 데 성공한 셈이다. 물론 아직 북한의 핵과 장거리 미사일 능력이 완성단계라고 보긴 어렵다. 핵무기로 쓰는 데 필수적인 탄두 소형화에 성공하지 못했고, 장거리 미사일 역시 3차례 실험에서 대륙간탄도미사일(ICBM)의 표준 사거리인 7000~ 8000㎞에 크게 미달했다. 그러나 북한이 지금과 같이 아무런 제약 없이 핵과 미사일 실험을 거듭한다면 우리는 머지않아 'ICBM에 핵탄두를 탑재한 핵보유국 북한'과 마주하게 될 것이다.

북한이 핵탄두를 실은 ICBM을 보유하게 되면 남한과는 차원이 다른 세상에서 살게 된다. 북한은 세계무대에서 핵보유국에 걸맞은 대접을 요구할 것이고 미국이 북한을 대하는 태도 역시 달라지게 된다. 북한은 이미 6자회담 등을 통해 '핵보유국' 인정을 요구해 왔다. '핵보유국 북한'은 남한을 아예 대등한 상대로 인정하지도 않으려 할 것이며, 한반도의 실질적 주연(主演)은 북한이라며 대한민국의 운명을 마음대로 주무르려 할 것이다.

오바마 미국 대통령은 현지시각 새벽 2시에 발표한 성명에서 "북한이 직접적이고 무모하게 국제사회에 도전하고 있다"고 비난했다. 정부도 "용납할 수 없는 도발"이라고 했다. 한·미 정부는 일본 등과 함께 새로운 대북 제재 결의안을 추진한다는 입장이다. 북한의 2차 핵실험은 2006년 1차 핵실험 후 추가 실험을 금지한 안보리 결의 1718호 위반이 분명해 안보리 차원의 대북 제재가 뒤따를 것으로 보인다.

그러나 유엔의 대북 제재는 지금껏 실효를 거두지 못했고 북한 역시 유엔 제재를 우습게 여기고 있다. 대북 제재의 강도를 결정하는 열쇠를 쥐고 있는 중국은 북한의 1차 핵실험 직후엔 "제멋대로 핵실험을 했다"고 격앙된 반응을 보였지만, 이날 2차 핵실험 직후 베트남 하노이에서 가진 한·중 외무장관회담에선 "냉정하게 앞으로의 사태를 예의주시해야 한다"고 했다. 북한은 미국과 중국 등에는 핵실험 사실을 사전 통보한 것으로 알려졌다. 북한이 핵실험 이후의 대북 제재 문제, 핵실험을 미끼로 한 대미(對美) 대화 재개 등을 염두에 두며 미국·중국 등과 전략적인 게임을 하고 있다는 뜻이다.

대한민국은 북한이 핵과 ICBM을 보유하는 사태로 가장 절박한 위협을 당하고 있으면서도 '핵확산금지조약'(NPT)과 '미사일기술통제체제'(MTCR) 및 한·미 미사일 양해 각서 등에 손발이 묶여 북한의 핵과 미사일 위협에 대한 실질적 대응 조치를 취할 길이 봉쇄돼 있다. 북한이 주장하는 핵 보유 명분은 '자위적 핵 억제력'이다. 지금 대한민국은 북한의 핵과 미사일 위협 아래서 바로 '자위를 위한 억지력'을 필요로 하고 있다. 대한민국과 대한민국 국민의 생존이 위협받는 상황이 오면 지금껏 우리의 손발을 묶어온 국제 조약 등의 제약을 그대로 둘 수 없다는 각오로 북한의 핵과 ICBM 문제에 부딪혀야 한다. 

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설]북핵 해결 노력 시급성 재확인시킨 2차 핵실험(한겨레 신문 2009년 5월 26일 23면)**

북한이 어제 오전 지하 핵실험을 강행했다. 장거리 로켓 발사, 핵 불능화 작업 중단 및 폐연료봉 재처리 재개 등 지난 몇 달 사이 강화해온 벼랑끝 전술의 고비다. 상황 변화가 없다면 추가 도발이 이어질 가능성이 있다.

이번 핵실험이 의외의 것은 아니다. 북한은 지난달 29일 외무성 대변인 성명에서, 핵실험과 대륙간탄도미사일 시험발사, 경수로발전소 건설 등을 예고했다. 당시 북한은 유엔 안보리가 로켓 발사를 비난하는 의장성명을 낸 데 대해 즉각 사죄하라는 비현실적 조건을 내걸었다. 핵실험 강행을 위한 억지 명분을 만든 셈이다. 그렇더라도 어제 핵실험은 갑작스럽다. 무엇보다 시기가 생각보다 이르다. 전문가들은 대개 6~7월 이후로 예상해왔다.

북한이 국제사회의 일치된 경고를 무시하고 핵실험을 한 이상 제재 논의는 불가피하다. 이번 핵실험은 2006년 10월 1차 핵실험 이후 유엔 안보리가 채택한 결의안 1718호에 정면으로 위배된다. 결의안은 각종 대북 제재를 명시하면서 추가 핵실험을 하지 말 것 등을 북한에 요구했다. 북한은 이를 잘 알면서도 핵실험을 강행했다. 응분의 책임을 지는 것은 당연하다.

사태가 왜 여기까지 왔는지를 진지하게 따져봐야 할 때다. 버락 오바마 미국 정부는 대북 포괄적 직접협상이라는 큰 틀을 잡아놓고도 구체적 방안 마련에서 늑장을 부렸다. 그 과정에서 북한의 로켓 발사가 부정적 영향을 끼쳤다고는 하지만, 미국의 안이한 태도가 상황 악화에 일조한 건 사실이다. 특히 미국 정부 안팎의 여러 인사들은 ‘북한이 카드를 다 쓰고 나면 대화에 나설 것’이라는 이른바 ‘선의의 무시’ 태도를 보였다. 핵실험을 막으려 하지 않고 기정사실화한 것이다.

북한이 공언한 ‘핵 능력 강화’의 주요 목표 가운데 하나가 대외 협상력 제고에 있음은 분명하다. 하지만 북한 핵문제를 근본적으로 풀기 위한 협상이 그냥 이뤄지지는 않는다. 적절한 협상 틀이 필요하고 관련국들의 확실한 의지가 담겨야 한다. 그런 준비 없는 선의의 무시 정책은 협상 출발 자체를 어렵게 만든다. 무한정 기다려도 좋을 정도로 시간 여유가 있는 것도 아니다. 상황 악화 조처가 이어지면 되돌리기가 그만큼 쉽지 않다.

북한 핵문제 해결 노력은 이제 분명한 전환점에 왔다. 대북 압박과 협상을 병행해야 한다는 공허한 수사가 아니라 구체적인 협상안을 갖고 속도감 있게 움직여야 한다. 특히 다음달 중순 정상회담을 앞둔 우리나라와 미국의 노력이 중요하다. 미국은 빨리 새 대북정책을 마무리한 뒤 행동에 나서고, 우리나라는 핵문제 해결 노력과 남북관계에서 주도적 구실을 되찾아야 한다. 지금처럼 사태 악화를 방치해서는 모두 피해자가 된다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설]김정일 집단, 핵무기만 끌어안고 살 수 있을까(동아일보 2009년 5월 26일 31면)**

북한이 어제 2차 핵실험을 강행했다. 남북한의 한반도 비핵화선언, 6자회담 합의, 유엔 안전보장이사회 결의 1718호를 정면으로 위반한 도발이다. 핵실험 후 북한은 ‘조선반도와 주변지역의 평화와 안전을 보장하는 데 이바지하게 될 것’이라고 강변했다. 김정일 집단이 위험한 불장난을 저질러놓고 늘어놓는 궤변이 지겨울 지경이다. 북한은 핵실험으로도 모자라 미사일을 3발이나 발사했다.

북의 2차 핵실험 의도는 분명해 보인다. 진구렁에 빠진 민생은 외면하고 이른바 선군(先軍)정치를 바탕으로 2012년 강성대국에 진입한다는 목표를 세워놓고 시간표대로 움직이고 있다. 4월 대포동 2호 로켓 발사에 이어 2차 핵실험까지 했으니 다음 수순은 뻔하다. 핵무기를 미사일 탑재가 가능하도록 소형화하는 작업을 벌일 것이다.

러시아 국방부는 이번 핵실험의 폭발력이 최고 20kt으로 3년 전 0.5kt의 40배라고 분석했다. 북한의 위협이 커지기는 했지만 국제사회가 자기들 뜻대로 휘둘릴 것이라고 판단한다면 착각이다. 버락 오바마 미국 대통령은 “북한은 직접적이고 무모하게 국제사회에 도전하고 있다”며 “북한이 대량살상무기와 전달 수단의 추구를 포기하지 않는다면 국제사회에 편입되는 방법을 찾지 못할 것”이라고 경고했다. 정부도 북의 핵실험을 ‘용납할 수 없는 도발’로 규정하는 성명을 발표했다.

우리는 2006년 10월 9일의 1차 핵실험과 어제의 2차 핵실험 사이에 있었던 일을 되돌아보며 교훈을 찾아야 한다. 유엔 안보리의 대북제재결의와 6자회담은 추가 핵실험을 막지 못했다. 미국을 포함한 국제사회는 말만으로는 북한의 핵무장을 저지할 수 없음을 확인한 이상 행동으로 보여줘야 한다. 한국 미국 일본 등 6자회담 참가국들이 철저한 공조를 통해 구체적 계획을 세울 필요가 있다. 중국과 러시아도 북한의 로켓 도발에 대한 안보리의 대응수위를 의장성명으로 낮춤으로써 결과적으로 핵실험을 막지 못한 책임을 통감하고 국제평화를 위해 안보리 상임이사국다운 역할을 해야 한다.

북한 정권은 핵무기만 가지면 독재체제를 유지할 수 있다고 판단할지 모른다. 그러나 김정일 집단이 굶기를 밥 먹듯 하는 2000여만 주민의 처참한 삶을 내팽개치고 핵무기와 미사일개발에만 돈을 쏟아 붓다가는 내부에서 먼저 붕괴음(崩壞音)이 들릴 것이다.

북의 추가 핵실험에 대해 민주당은 “이명박 정부의 냉전적 대북정책이 불러일으킨 결과”라는 성명을 냈다. 그렇다면 한없이 유화적인 대북정책을 펴던 노무현 정부 때 북이 1차 핵실험을 한 것에 대해서는 어떤 말로 설명할 것인가. 중대한 안보위협인 북의 핵실험을 놓고 정부를 탓하는 것은 무책임한 정치공세다.

(우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 마지막 문장을 추가하였다.)

**[사설] 한미 FTA 살리려면 미국이 먼저 해법을 내놓아야(조선일보, 2009년 5월 25일 35면)**

김종훈 통상교섭본부장은 22일 한미 자유무역협정(FTA)과 관련해 "미국측이 먼저 해법을 제시해야 하며 그 해법은 우리가 수용 가능하고 기존 이익의 균형을 해치지 않아야 한다"고 말했다. 그는 "합의된 협정문을 새로 쓰자는 것은 있을 수 없다. 협정문 밖에서 무엇을 하느냐는 것은 문제를 제기한 미국측이 풀어야 한다"고도 했다.

김 본부장 말대로 2007년 4월 협상 타결 후 2년 넘게 질질 끌고 있는 한미 FTA 비준·발효 문제를 풀어야 할 책임은 미국에 있다. 한국 국회는 여야 간의 물리적 충돌과 폭력사태까지 겪으며 지난 4월 한미 FTA 비준동의안을 상임위에서 처리해 본회의로 넘겼다. 그러나 미국에선 아직 비준동의안이 의회에 상정되지도 못했다.

미국 의회와 행정부는 그동안 쇠고기와 자동차 협상 결과가 미국에 불리하게 돼 있다며 한미 FTA 재협상을 요구해왔다. 그러나 미국육류수출협회는 최근 "의회에 쇠고기 협상을 재개하라는 요청을 하지 않겠다"고 못을 박았다. 종업원에 대한 '과(過)복지'와 무책임한 경영으로 파산상태에 빠져 국민 세금으로 기업을 살려달라고 정부에 매달리고 있는 미국 자동차업계 역시 한국과의 자동차 무역이 공평하지 않다고 볼멘소리 할 처지가 아니다.

다행히 최근 들어 미국에서도 변화 기류가 일고 있다. 오바마 대통령은 지난 20일 한덕수 주미대사에게 "미국의 7대 교역국가인 한국과의 FTA는 양 국민을 위한 번영을 강화 증진할 것"이라고 했다. 과거 대선 후보 시절 "한미 자동차 교역은 자유무역이 아니다"라며 한미 FTA를 비판했던 것과는 달라진 모습이다. 론 커크 미국 무역대표부(USTR) 대표도 최근 "미국과 세계 경제를 빠르게 회복시키기 위해선 기존에 체결된 FTA와 새로운 FTA를 통해 교역을 확대해야 한다"고 했다. 미국은 이제 그 말을 행동으로 옮겨 자유무역 원칙을 실천하는 모습을 보여야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설]6월 한미정상회담, FTA 발효 시발점돼야(동아일보 2009년 5월 23일 27면)**

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 20일 한덕수 주미 한국대사에게 “미국의 7대 교역국인 한국과의 자유무역협정(FTA)은 양국 국민의 번영을 강화, 증진시킬 것”이라고 말했다. 오바마 대통령은 지난달 영국 런던에서 열린 이명박 대통령과의 한미 정상회담에서도 “FTA를 진전시키려는 강한 의지를 갖고 있다”고 강조한 바 있다. 원론적 수준의 언급이지만 그가 대선 후보 시절 한미 FTA에 부정적이었던 것과 비교하면 의미 있는 변화로 볼 수 있다.

미 의회의 한미 FTA 비준에서 주요 걸림돌로 꼽힌 쇠고기 문제도 분위기가 개선되고 있다. 조엘 해거드 미국육류수출협회 수석부회장은 21일 “우리는 의회에 쇠고기 협상을 재개하라는 요청을 하지 않을 것”이라고 못 박았다. 해거드 부회장은 “미국산 쇠고기의 판매 속도가 부진하다”면서도 과거에 비해 누그러진 태도를 보였다. 미국 축산 농가를 대변하는 이 협회의 태도 변화는 미 의회 비준 과정에서 원군(援軍)이 될 것 같다.

그렇지만 아직 낙관하기엔 이르다. 미 행정부와 의회에서는 여전히 한미 FTA가 미 자동차업계에 불리하다고 보는 인사가 적지 않다. 미 하원 무역소위원회 샌더 레빈 위원장과 FTA 담당위원회인 세입위의 찰스 랭걸 위원장은 “자동차 문제 해결 없이는 한 발짝도 움직일 수 없다”고 공언했다. 미 무역대표부(USTR)의 팀 리프 신임 법률고문도 비슷한 생각을 갖고 있다.

한미 FTA 협정안의 수정은 한국으로선 받아들이기 어렵다. 다만 기존 협정을 건드리지 않고 추가 양해를 통해 양국이 함께 윈윈 하는 방안을 고려해볼 수 있을 것이다. 김종훈 통상교섭본부장은 어제 “합의된 협정문을 새로 쓰자는 것은 있을 수 없다”고 전제한 뒤 ”미국 측이 먼저 해법을 제시해야 하며, 우리가 수용 가능하고 기존 이익의 균형을 해치지 않는 해법이라야 한다”고 말했다.

한국 국회는 지난달 한미 FTA 비준동의안을 외교통상통일위원회에서 처리해 본회의로 넘겼다. 미 정부와 의회도 두 나라 교역 확대와 고용 증진, 안보 동맹 강화에 기여할 한미 FTA의 중요성을 인식한다면 처리를 앞당겨야 할 것이다.

다음 달 16일 미국에서 열릴 한미 정상회담이 한미 FTA 비준 및 발효(發效)를 향해 큰 걸음을 내딛는 계기가 되기 바란다. 우리 정부도 미국에서 FTA 비준 처리가 탄력을 받을 수 있도록 민관(民官) 외교채널을 풀가동해 설득 작업을 계속해야 할 것이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)
===== 특집 =====

**美 “한국에 글로벌호크 팔겠다” 공식 확인(동아일보 2009년 5월 23일 8면; 발췌)**
윤상호 기자

미국이 (노무현 정부에서 판매 불가를 고수했던) 고고도(高高度) 무인정찰기(UAV) 글로벌호크의 한국 판매를 결정했지만 정작 군 당국이 도입 연기를 결정해 그 배경에 관심이 쏠리고 있다.

22일 군 소식통에 따르면 14일 미국 워싱턴에서 열린 제22차 한미 안보정책구상회의(SPI)에서 미 국방부는 글로벌호크를 한국에 판매하겠다는 최종 방침을 전달했다. (중략)…미국 측의 이런 태도는 노무현 정부 때와 확연히 비교된다. 국방부는 전시작전통제권 전환 이후 독자적인 대북 정보수집 능력을 갖추기 위해 2005년 6월 미국에 글로벌호크의 구매 의사를 최초로 전달했다. 하지만 미국은 핵심기술의 유출 우려 등을 들어 난색을 표했다. 이후에도 국방부와 방위사업청 관계자들이 한미 연례안보협의회(SCM) 등을 통해 거듭 도입 의사를 밝혔지만 미국은 요지부동이었다.

미국이 글로벌호크의 판매 불가를 고수한 것은 노무현 정부 시절 껄끄러웠던 한미관계가 주된 원인이었다. …하지만 한국에서 정권이 교체된 뒤 동맹 복원에 나서자 미국의 태도가 달라지기 시작했다.

…그러나 이번엔 한국군이 글로벌호크 도입 시기를 2015년으로 다시 연기했다. 그 대신 중고도 무인정찰기를 자체 개발하기로 사실상 방침을 바꾼 것이다. 군 수뇌부는 한미동맹이 복원돼 전작권 전환 후에도 미국에서 대북 정보를 충분히 받을 수 있다며 글로벌호크를 도입할 필요가 없다고 주장한 것으로 알려졌다. 하지만 중고도 무인정찰기의 개발 배치는 2015년에나 가능하고, 전작권 전환 이후 미국이 대북 정보를 완벽하게 제공할지 장담할 수 없는 만큼 글로벌호크의 도입을 앞당겨야 한다는 목소리도 적지 않다.

**김정일에게 핵은 더 이상 협상용 아닌 생존용이 됐다(중앙일보, 2009년 5월 26일 3면; 발췌)**
김영희 선임 칼럼리스트

뉴스 분석

…북한이 미국 기자 두 명을 재판에 회부하고, 핵실험과 미사일 발사를 동시에 강행한 것을 보면 2006년 미국이 방코델타아시아(BDA) 계좌를 동결한 것과 같은, 북한에 가장 고통스러운 제재를 가한다고 해도 핵 보유를 통한 체제 안전이라는 선택을 포기할 것 같지는 않다.

…지난해 여름 이래 김정일의 건강에 문제가 생기면서 군부의 발언권이 압도적으로 커져 핵 보유로 체제의 안전을 지키자는 노선이 김정일의 동의 아래 6자회담의 비핵화 합의를 이행하여 북·미 관계 정상화에서 활로를 찾자는 노선을 압도한 것으로 보인다.

김정일이 셋째 아들 정운에게 권력을 넘길 준비를 하고 있는 것이 확실해 보인다. 김정일이 북한을 통치할 수 없는 사태가 올 때 김정운이 어떤 직함으로 어느 정도의 권력을 행사할 것인지는 아직 확실치 않다. 그러나 한 가지 전망은 가능하다. 그것은 김정일이 핵과 장거리 미사일로 무장한 ‘핵국가’를 아들에게 물려주는 것이 남북, 북·미, 북·일 관계 개선과 정상화를 통한 것보다 훨씬 안전한 생존 전략이라는 판단을 했다는 것이다.

먼저 유엔 안보리를 통한 강도 높은 북한 제재는 필수적이다. …이제 유엔 안보리는 그 권능의 범위 안에서 가능한 모든 제재를 동원할 수밖에 없다. 일본 같은 개별 국가들의 보완 제재도 필요하다. 여기서 가장 중요한 것이 중국의 제재 동참이다. 6월의 한·미 정상회담에서는 단기적인 대응에서는 중국과의 공조가 집중적으로 논의되어야 한다.

…북한이 확실히 핵 보유로 간다고 판단되어도 남북 대화는 모색할 가치가 있는가. 대답은 “예스”다. 핵은 남북 관계의 일부다. 핵을 넘어선 남북 관계, 넓은 의미의 한국 문제가 북한의 2차 핵실험을 맞은 한국이 수립할 새로운 대북정책의 출발점이어야 한다.

한편으로 북한과 계속 대화를 모색하면서 다른 한편으론 미국과는 한국에 대한 핵우산의 유지·강화 문제와 미·일 미사일방어망(MD) 체제의 활용 문제를 논의해야 한다. 그러면서 한국은 미국의 협력과 중국의 양해를 확보하여 북한의 단거리 미사일을 요격할 한국판 미사일방어망 구축의 방도를 중·장기 과제로 검토해야 한다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL826.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 14 SEOUL 000826 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; May 26, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
All, All TVs 
North Korea Conducts Second Nuclear Test; North Korea 
Also Test-Fires 3 Missiles 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
North Korea's state media reported that North Korean leader Kim 
Jong-il expressed his condolences to the bereaved family of former 
ROK President Roh Moo-hyun who died on Saturday.  This took place 
just hours before North Korea conducted its second nuclear test. 
(All, All TVs) 
 
U.S. Ambassador to the ROK Kathleen Stephens visited the mourning 
altar yesterday to pay tribute to former President Roh. (Chosun) 
 
Health officials said on May 25 that an additional H1N1 infection 
case was found among a group of foreign English teachers with 14 
others having already tested positive for the virus. As of 
yesterday, the total number of people who have contracted the 
disease in the ROK is 22. (All, All TVs) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------------- 
 
North Korea said on May 25 that it conducted a successful second 
nuclear test to strengthen its "nuclear deterrent for self-defense." 
 The North said the underground nuclear test was "safely conducted 
on a new higher level in terms of its explosive power and the 
technology of its control." (All, All TVs) 
 
The ROK's presidential office said that North Korea also test-fired 
three short-range surface-to-air missiles from eastern coastal 
launch sites. (All, All TVs) 
 
President Lee Myung-bak chaired an emergency National Security 
Council meeting in response to the test.  The ROK condemned the 
North's move as an intolerable provocation that clearly violated 
inter-Korean and multinational agreements and a UN resolution that 
banned its nuclear test and missile-related activities. (All, All 
TVs) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama said that the test was "a threat to 
international peace" and "warrants action by the international 
community." Also, Japan and the European Union condemned North 
Korea's nuclear test as a violation of UN sanctions.  The Chinese 
Foreign Ministry issued a statement strongly condemning North 
Korea's nuclear test. (All, All TVs) 
 
The Russian Defense Ministry was quoted as saying the explosion 
measured up to 20 kilotons, 20 times more powerful than the 2006 
test. (All, All TVs) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-North Korea 
------------ 
 
-Nuclear Test 
All the ROK media carried prominent reports on the second nuclear 
test North Korea conducted on May 25.  ROK media noted that the test 
was conducted just hours after North Korean media reported that 
leader Kim Jong-il had expressed his condolences to the bereaved 
family of former ROK President Roh Moo-hyun who died on Saturday. 
In an inside-page analytical item in right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo, 
the columnist opined that that North Korea's nuclear test was 
 
SEOUL 00000826  002 OF 014 
 
 
carried out in an effort to "maintain its political system."   The 
columnist also observed that, after the nuclear test was conducted, 
the North Korean policies of other countries which are premised on 
denuclearization became almost useless.  Conservative Dong-a Ilbo 
reported on the front page that North Korea did not consider events 
in the ROK when scheduling the second nuclear test on May 25  (and 
went ahead with the test despite the death of former ROK president 
Roh.)   According to the newspaper, some experts believe that North 
Korea chose May 25 for its second nuclear test because it fell on 
U.S. Memorial Day. 
 
Dong-a Ilbo noted that North Korea claimed that it had conducted a 
second nuclear test to strengthen its "nuclear deterrent for 
self-defense."  The newspaper observed that North Korea's action 
could fuel anti-North Korea sentiment in the ROK and may increase 
public support for President Lee Myung-bak's North Korea policy. 
 
Citing the Russian Defense Ministry, Dong-a Ilbo noted that the 
explosion measured up to 20 kilotons, 20 times more powerful than 
the 2006 test. 
 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo noted that many observers believe that North 
Korea conducted its second nuclear test to enhance its negotiating 
power in talks with the U.S. and increase pressure on the U.S. 
According to the newspaper, other observers believe that the North's 
nuclear test was intended to be a follow-up to the first nuclear 
test (in 2006) in order to technically improve and complete its 
nuclear weapons program. 
 
Most ROK media reported strong reaction from the international 
community to North Korea's nuclear test.  Conservative Chosun Ilbo 
quoted U.S. President Barack Obama as saying that the test was a 
"threat to international peace" and "warrants action by the 
international community."  According to the newspaper, Japan and the 
European Union condemned North Korea's nuclear test as a violation 
of UN sanctions, and the Chinese Foreign Ministry issued a statement 
strongly condemning North Korea's nuclear test. 
 
In a related development, according to most ROK media, the ROK's 
presidential office said that North Korea also test-fired three 
short-range surface-to-air missiles from its eastern coastal launch 
site. 
 
JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "The fact that North Korea has become a 
nuclear state poses a grave threat to our national security.  We 
need to reexamine and reorganize our security measures immediately. 
Although our conventional weapons are much stronger than North 
Korea's, they are useless before a nuclear weapon.  Since we are not 
in a position to possess nuclear weapons immediately, we have no 
choice but to entirely depend on the U.S. nuclear umbrella." 
 
Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "Although the ROK is under desperate 
threat from North Korea's possession of nuclear weapons and 
intercontinental ballistic missiles, there is no way for the ROK to 
take substantial countermeasures against North Korea's nuclear and 
missile threats because Seoul is bound by the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Missile Technology Control Regime, and 
the ROK-U.S. Memorandum of Understanding on missiles.  ... Under 
North Korea's nuclear and missile threat, the ROK now needs 
"deterrence for self-defense." 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun editorialized: "Although the Barack Obama 
Administration has adopted a big picture approach favoring 
comprehensive direct negotiations with North Korea, it has dragged 
its feet over coming up with specific measures. ... It is true that 
the U.S.'s relaxed attitude contributed to aggravating the 
situation. ... In particular, by snubbing North Korea with "benign 
neglect," many U.S. officials did not try to prevent the nuclear 
test but made it an established fact." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
 
SEOUL 00000826  003 OF 014 
 
 
DEATH OF PUBLIC MAN 
(JoongAng Ilbo, May 26, Page 43) 
 
By Senior Columnist Moon Chang-keuk 
 
I can understand how (former President Roh Moo-hyun) may have felt 
but I don't think his choice (to commit suicide) was right.  He 
should have considered the effect that the death of a person who 
once served as a national leader would produce.  We may ask what 
else a person intent on killing himself could have in mind? 
However, this (lack of serious thought on future effects) was (also) 
his weak point during his term in office.  Why wasn't he conscious 
of the "representativeness" and "seriousness" of having served as 
former president?  What if he had written in a death note that he is 
ending his life because he could not save his honor as president but 
he hopes that his death will make this country follow a new path, 
going beyond divisiveness?  In this country, which infamously has 
recorded the highest rate of suicide in the world, what impact would 
be felt if the person who once served as president takes his own 
life? 
 
Supposedly, death forgives everything but his death should be judged 
based on whether it is the death of a "natural man" or a "public 
man."  As a natural man, we feel regret and grief but his act as a 
public man was inappropriate.  The prosecution's handling (of this 
matter after his death) is also problematic.  The prosecutors pushed 
him too hard as if he were a serious criminal and then, upon his 
death, announced that all investigations (into his alleged 
corruption) will cease.  The right to arraignment is no longer 
effective after the death of a concerned party but it does not mean 
that the crimes have also vanished.  I don't suggest we harass him 
(even after his death).  (But) the facts should be clarified and we 
should ascertain whether the prosecutors went too far (in 
investigating him).  It is the same with the security service.  The 
security service should have prepared thoroughly against even this 
possibility.   Our country became infamous for its inability to 
protect former presidents.  Saying that (his) death is regrettable 
is one thing, but protecting the "framework" of a country is 
another. 
 
The meaning of death depends not on the one who died but how those 
who are left behind consider the death.  In this sense, I suggest we 
put an end to divisiveness through his death.  Let's shake off the 
hatred we harbor against each other.  Let's halt last decade's 
conflict through his death.  In particular, aren't those who love 
him obligated to make his death meaningful? 
 
 
COOPERATION AT 'PEOPLE'S FUNERAL' FOR ROH 
(Dong-a Ilbo, May 25, 2009, Page 31) 
 
A "people`s funeral" will be held for former President Roh Moo-hyun 
Friday following a seven-day mourning period.  A people`s funeral 
means the ceremony will be held in the name of the people. 
Cooperation at all levels is required to carry out the funeral in a 
solemn and calm manner. 
 
The government's decision to hold such a funeral might reflect the 
people's desire to use the funeral as an opportunity to promote 
national reconciliation.  Roh`s bereaved wife and aides who first 
wanted a family funeral probably accepted the government's 
suggestion in order to promote the cause (for national 
reconciliation.)  Therefore, everyone should cooperate in order to 
ensure a peaceful funeral regardless of what they thought of the 
deceased.  To help in carrying out the funeral in a solemn and calm 
manner is not only a way to offer condolences to the bereaved 
family, but can also fulfill the duties of mature citizens. 
 
In this context, the drastic action taken by certain Roh supporters 
at the funeral hall in his hometown is cause for concern.  Prime 
Minister Han Seung-soo, who visited the funeral hall to express his 
condolences on behalf of the government, was blocked by the 
supporters.  They even threw eggs or water at National Assembly 
Speaker Kim Hyong-o and the head of the minor conservative Liberty 
 
SEOUL 00000826  004 OF 014 
 
 
Forward Party Lee Hoi-chang.  Former Grand National Party leader 
Park Geun-hye also could not offer her condolences and even the 
former presidential candidate of the main opposition Democratic 
Party Chung Dong-young had to wait a day before he could do so. 
Some even went as far as trampling on flowers sent by President Lee 
Myung-bak, former President Chun Doo-hwan and ruling party Chairman 
Park Hee-tae.  It is a disgrace to the deceased and his bereaved 
family for supporters to rudely treat those who tried to express 
their condolences to the bereaved family regardless of their 
political stance, and visitors to the funeral hall who traveled a 
great distance. 
 
It is equally undesirable for some people to suggest that there was 
a political conspiracy behind Roh's death and to use Web bulletin 
boards, that were set up for expressing condolences, as a means to 
instigate another round of candlelight vigils.  Some people are also 
trying to reignite social unrest by abusing the good will of people 
just wishing to express their condolences.  Roh in his suicide note 
urged (us) "not to blame anyone."  If his death leads to more finger 
pointing and bitter criticism, his soul cannot rest in peace.  If 
his supporters wish to sincerely mourn his death, they need a calm 
and rational attitude. 
 
The differences (in public opinion) over the death of a former head 
of state is largely blamed on politics that has driven a wedge 
between people instead of promoting social cohesion.  Former 
National Assembly Speaker Kim Soo-han said, "The maturity of the 
people is equal to that of national politics.  It is time for us to 
look back at ourselves instead of pointing fingers at others." 
Korea`s political leaders need to ensure that Roh's death can result 
in social harmony and cohesion rather than in conflict and 
divisiveness. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
A MOMENT FOR NATIONAL UNITY 
(JoongAng Ilbo, May 25, 2009, Page 42) 
 
A chorus of condolence calls is pouring in lamenting the tragic 
death of the 16th President of Korea.  To express their deep sorrow, 
citizens are walking more than two kilometers to Bongha Village, the 
home of former President Roh Moo-hyun, where his body lies in state. 
 A steady stream of people, many holding children by the hand, leads 
into downtown Seoul to burn incense at makeshift mourning altars. 
Volunteers are busy helping people express their sympathy in an 
orderly manner.  Yesterday, people prayed for Roh's eternal rest in 
heaven and for the bereaved family's good health at churches, 
cathedrals and temples nationwide.  People conveyed a message of 
condolence, irrespective of age, gender or social status, whether in 
the ruling or opposition camp, whether conservative or progressive, 
pro-Roh or anti-Roh. 
 
The whole nation is expressing sadness - even Park Geun-hye, former 
chairperson of the Grand National Party, who was one of the late 
Roh's major political rivals while he was in office. Her supporters' 
group, Parksamo, released a message of respect for the late former 
president.  "Although we struggled with him during his whole term in 
office due to our different ideologies and political stances, he was 
a president of great importance from a long-term historical 
perspective," they said.  The incumbent President, Lee Myung-bak, is 
scheduled to visit the ceremonial funeral hall in Bongha Village. 
After a seven-day mourning period, the former president will be laid 
to rest in his home village, in accordance with his will. 
 
His suicide, jumping off a cliff, is a shocking tragedy that defies 
explanation.  This death is unprecedented, and it comes during a 
tumultuous time for Korea.  Many people are experiencing tough 
circumstances during this economic crisis.  The nation is also in 
disarray due to social conflicts, political deadlock between the two 
Koreas, conflict between labor and management, the issue of 
irregular workers, conflicts on legislation between the ruling and 
opposition parties and physical struggles by radical labor unions. 
 
SEOUL 00000826  005 OF 014 
 
 
In these circumstances, with many people feeling a sense of unease, 
the suicide of the former national leader, who had been leading the 
country until just last year, can only be described as shocking. 
 
It is urgent and imperative that Korean society weathers this tragic 
event prudently, and strengthens its firm foundation for stability 
and historical development in order to help the country move 
forward.  Most importantly, the grieving family must be shown proper 
respect, and the funeral to carry Roh to his eternal rest must be 
conducted in a sensible and respectful manner.  We should also take 
this opportunity to look back calmly on Roh's political legacy, 
which now falls to all of us to inherit and develop.  We must give 
his historic presidency its due. 
 
In a situation where conflict still runs rampant, what matters most 
is calm and serenity in carrying out these difficult tasks.  As 
President Roh wrote in his last testament, "Don't blame anyone." 
That applies to all of us.  Though political figures or interest 
groups may hold opinions completely contrary to Roh's, and may have 
engaged in bitter struggles against him and his supporters on policy 
and social issues, we can only move Korea forward through 
compromise.  And that cannot be done by excluding the followers of 
the late former president. 
 
Similarly, it is inappropriate to blame the prosecutors for the 
death of President Roh without any evidence, or to block specific 
persons or groups from expressing their condolences at his funeral. 
Actions like these would not resolve any conflicts and would be 
contrary to the wishes of the late president.  For example: It was 
wrong to destroy the flowers sent by President Lee Myung-bak. 
 
The public will simply not tolerate particular groups of people 
appropriating Roh's death to mobilize politically and to plan 
aggressive demonstrations.  The crowds participating in this 
procession of condolences intend to extend their sympathy for 
President Roh and his bereaved family.  But this expression should 
also be a calm manifestation of the people's will not to exacerbate 
social conflict. 
 
The bereaved family accepted the proposal of the government to hold 
a "people's funeral" for the late president.  A people's funeral is 
meant to send the deceased to eternal rest, sharing the sadness of 
the whole nation and extending sympathy to the bereaved family.  In 
the modern history of Korea, its first President, Syngman Rhee; the 
great patriot Kim Gu, and President Choi Kyu-hah all went to their 
eternal rest honorably at people's funerals.  A people's funeral is 
the end, in the sense that it gives us a chance to bid farewell to a 
late national leader, but it also implies a new starting point for 
national accord.  We would like to suggest that while the funeral is 
taking place, all the various groups reflect upon the five years of 
rule by our national leader, Roh Moo-hyun, regardless of ideology or 
political faction. 
 
Let us ponder what he tried to say in deciding to leap to his death. 
 If Korean society falls into conflict and chaos instead, we are 
likely to lose even more than our former national leader.  The world 
is watching the Republic of Korea.  In a mature and harmonious 
atmosphere, we should send President Roh Moo-hyun off with respect, 
conveying the heartfelt sympathy of the whole nation. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
ON THE POLITICAL MURDER OF ROH 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, May 25, 2009, Page 23) 
 
"Many people have suffered because of me.  I cannot imagine the 
suffering they and I will go through in the future, too." 
 
In these two lines in the suicide note left by the late President 
Roh Moo-hyun, we can fathom how great the pressure and suffering was 
that he had to endure since leaving office.  The core of this was 
caused by suspicions of corruption related to Taekwang Industrial 
 
SEOUL 00000826  006 OF 014 
 
 
Chairman Park Yeon-cha.  As a result of this scandal, Roh's family 
members were virtually ruined, and people that had formerly stood by 
Roh were hurt, also. 
 
It is customary that punishment follows if corruption is discovered, 
but one cannot erase the impression that in the Park Yeon-cha case, 
it proceeded in exactly the opposite way.  This case unfolded with a 
set objective to get Roh, and (thereafter) various public organs 
began engaging in crossfire.  Many observers say that the "strange" 
behavior of the tax authorities and prosecutors in relation to the 
Park case resulted in a "political murder." 
 
The Park case began with an audit of Taekwang Industrial (company) 
conducted in July of last year.  The responsible organ for this 
audit was the 4th Inspection Bureau of the Seoul Regional Tax 
Office, which handles real estate speculation and complex matters 
where various forms of business intersect.  Agents boasting the 
greatest investigative power were unprecedentedly dispatched to the 
headquarters of the medium-sized company of no more than 500 billion 
Won in sales a year located in Gimhae, Gyeongsangnam-do.  Even 
within the National Tax Service (NTS), there were people claiming 
that Han Sang-yool, the head of the NTS at the time who was seeking 
reappointment, was conducting a "political investigation" to curry 
favor with the Lee Myung-bak Administration.  It is said Han 
directly reported details discovered by the 4th Inspection Bureau 
regarding the money transactions between former President Roh's side 
and Park to President Lee. 
 
The Felony Bureau of the Supreme Prosecutor's Office launched its 
investigation of Park late last year and, starting in March of this 
year, they began a full-scale investigation of Roh, adding eight 
prosecutors to ten who were already participating in the 
investigation.  Prosecutors had explained they were boosting the 
number of investigators because they were being used to support the 
arraignment of other cases, including the fire sale of Korea 
Exchange Bank (KEB), stock manipulation in the takeover of KEB's 
credit card unit, and lobbying charges against Jo Pung-Eon in 
relation to Daewoo Information Systems who had been found not guilty 
by lower courts.  However, it has been revealed that the number of 
investigators was increased during the course of the investigation 
in order to get Roh.  Unlike a traditional special investigation, 
which seeks to precisely and quickly cut out only the infected part, 
prosecutors rampaged with a "gotcha" investigation that shook the 
rugs until the dust flew. 
 
In this regard, we can say the case of late President Roh was the 
most unfortunate in South Korean history, brought about by the Lee 
Myung-bak Administration, which despised the person more than the 
crime. President Roh's death should serve as an opportunity to end 
political retaliation led by the authorities. 
 
* We have compared the English version on the website with the 
Korean version and added the last sentence to make them identical. 
 
 
LET ROH REST IN PEACE 
(Chosun Ilbo, May 25, 2009, Page 35) 
 
The government has decided to conduct a public funeral for former 
President Roh Moo-hyun, who died Saturday, after a seven-day 
mourning period.  Roh's ashes will be buried in Bongha Village in 
accordance with the wishes of the family.  This will be the second 
public funeral for an ex-president following Choi Kyu-ha's in 2006. 
Family funerals were held for former Presidents Syngman Rhee and Yun 
Po-son, and a state funeral for Ex-President Park Chung-hee. 
 
Mourners are lining up to pay their respects to Roh at an altar at 
Bongha Village Hall and at makeshift memorials set up across the 
country.  President Lee Myung-bak is reportedly scheduled to visit 
the Bongha Village Hall altar to pay his respect.  Condolence calls 
are underway across the country, mostly peacefully, though some Roh 
supporters turned away Prime Minister Han Seong-soo and Liberty 
Forward Party Chairman Lee Hoi-chang on Saturday and National 
Assembly Speaker Kim Hyung-o on Sunday.  They threw eggs and water 
 
SEOUL 00000826  007 OF 014 
 
 
bottles at a bus carrying Lee Hoi-chang, who was forced to return 
home.  Rep. Chung Dong-young, who confronted Roh at the end of his 
tenure by dissolving the then Uri Party, was also prevented from 
visiting the altar and called a "traitor" but managed to visit the 
next day. 
 
Shocked as they were at the sudden death of Roh, it runs against the 
will of the departed for supporters to stop visitors or openly 
disgrace mourners.  Those who were either Roh's political rivals or 
confronted Roh from different political positions, too, went there 
because they feel sorry for his unexpected death and to pray for the 
repose of his soul. 
 
It was also inappropriate for members of Roh's support group Nosamo 
to force a KBS relay vehicle out of the memorial hall on grounds 
that reports were unfavorable, and questioned reporters about their 
companies and demanded ID.  If Nosamo has decided to assume 
voluntary services during the funeral, members must display the 
requisite courtesy.  Conducting a signature campaign impeaching the 
Lee Myung-bak Administration at some makeshift memorials also goes 
against the spirit of decent mourning. 
 
Roh's abrupt death brings home how vain the rise and fall of power 
is and how futile it is to nurse hatred and conflict in pursuit of 
them.  Roh himself said in his will, "Aren't life and death both 
part of nature?  Don't blame anybody."  He would not have wished his 
own death to cause more political confusion and social conflict. 
 
It stands to reason that the living, through his unforeseen death, 
should renew their determination to put an end to the chains of the 
bad karma South Korean politics has shouldered over the past 
half-century, and pray that Roh may enjoy the peace in heaven that 
he could not find in this world.  Let us hope that the funeral will 
offer an occasion to bring about not more division into "us" and 
"them" but an atmosphere where we can look back on the pain of 
others as our own. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
NEW CRISIS, CALM RESPONSE 
(JoongAng Ilbo, May 26, 2009, Page 42) 
 
North Korea has conducted its second nuclear test, an act that has 
drastically changed the security environment on and around the 
Korean Peninsula.  In the past, the international community has not 
officially admitted that North Korea possesses nuclear weapons. 
Now, like it or not, it has to regard the communist country as a 
nuclear state. 
 
The countries of Northeast Asia have long expressed the hope that 
North Korea would give up its nuclear weapons and programs.  Other 
countries in other regions of the world share this view. 
 
But until the North gives up its nuclear programs and weapons, the 
international community will continue to intensify its response, and 
aid to North Korea will no longer be offered.  That will only serve 
to increase the hardships faced by North Korean citizens, increasing 
resentment against their leaders.  The nuclear test has also ruined 
North Korea's plans to become a so-called "strong and prosperous 
state" by 2012. 
 
We are in serious trouble.  The fact that North Korea has become a 
nuclear state poses a grave threat to our national security.  We 
need to reexamine and reorganize our security measures immediately. 
Although our conventional weapons are much stronger than North 
Korea's, they are useless before a nuclear weapon.  Since we are not 
in a position to possess nuclear weapons immediately, we have no 
choice but to entirely depend on the U.S. nuclear umbrella. 
 
We must further enhance the South Korea-U.S. alliance.  At the South 
Korea-U.S. summit scheduled for next month, we should request 
President Barack Obama to reconfirm an agreement to offer the U.S. 
 
SEOUL 00000826  008 OF 014 
 
 
nuclear umbrella to South Korea. 
 
The Kaesong Industrial Complex could now become a place where 
hostages are held in order to threaten South Korea, rather than a 
frontier where our companies and workers can lay the groundwork for 
future inter-Korean relations.  Even though the Kaesong complex does 
not need to close immediately, we must be prepared to deal with the 
worst.  Since North Korea has gone ahead with its second nuclear 
test, the chance that it will give up its nuclear weapons and 
programs has grown ever more distant. 
 
Still, it's the goal we can never give up.  It will be impossible to 
achieve lasting peace on the Korean Peninsula, not to mention 
reunification, if North Korea does not abandon its nuclear weapons 
and programs.  We need to do everything we can to make this a 
realit. 
 
North Korea's second nuclear test has changed the world.  But we 
must not panic or get overwhelmed.  The government and the people 
must work together to respond to this new crisis in a calm and 
rational way. 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
¶S. KOREA MAY NEED ITS OWN DETERRENT 
(Chosun Ilbo, May 26, 2009, Page 31) 
 
North Korea said Monday that it "successfully" conducted another 
underground nuclear test.  Despite warnings and efforts by the 
international community to dissuade it, North Korea conducted its 
first nuclear test on Oct. 9, 2006 and a second test now.  It also 
launched three short-range missiles.  The same day, the (North 
Korean) state-run news agencies reported that North Korean leader 
Kim Jong-il sent a telegram of condolence to former South Korean 
President Roh Moo-hyun's family. 
 
The U.S. and South Korean governments sensed an artificial seismic 
wave measuring 4.5 on the Richter scale at around 9:45 a.m. on 
Monday in Kilju, North Hamgyong Province.  The first nuclear test in 
2006 created a seismic wave measuring 3.6.  The one-point difference 
on the Richter scale signifies at least a 10-fold increase in the 
intensity of explosion.  North Korea's nuclear test created a 
seismic wave around 0.9 points stronger than the original test. 
U.S. officials say the size of the first nuclear test was equivalent 
to 1 kt of dynamite, while the second test is estimated equivalent 
to more than 2 to 3 kt.  The power of the atomic bombs that were 
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan just before the end of 
World War II in 1945 was around 15 kt and 22 kt. 
 
The long-range rocket North Korea launched on April 5 flew 3,200 km. 
 The effective range had almost doubled compared to the first 
missile launched in 1998, which flew a distance of 1,620 km.  This 
year, in other words, North Korea has succeeded in more than 
doubling the power of its nuclear weapons and long-range missiles. 
It is still too early to conclude that the nuclear weapon and 
long-range missile capabilities are in their final stage of 
completion.  The power of its nuclear weapon lags far behind the 
atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima 64 years ago, while in three 
separate tests, its long-range missile fell far short of the 7,000 
km to 8,000 km range considered the standard for intercontinental 
ballistic missiles.  But if North Korea continues its tests without 
any limitations, we will soon face a country that has a nuclear 
warhead on an intercontinental ballistic missile. 
 
It would then be in a completely different class from South Korea. 
It would want to be treated as a nuclear power by the international 
community, and U.S. treatment would also change.  North Korea has 
already demanded to be treated as a nuclear state during the 
Six-Party Talks and through other channels.  If it was, it would no 
longer try to recognize South Korea as an equal and would attempt to 
alter the fate of the South by touting its superiority on the Korean 
Peninsula. 
 
 
SEOUL 00000826  009 OF 014 
 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama issued a statement accusing North Korea 
of "directly and recklessly challenging the international 
community."  The South Korean government said the nuclear test was 
an "intolerable act of provocation."  The U.S. and South Korean 
governments, along with Japan, plan to pursue a new resolution 
imposing sanctions on North Korea.  The nuclear test is a clear 
violation of UN Security Council Resolution 1718, which bars the 
North from conducting further tests, necessitating new measures from 
the council. 
 
But UN sanctions so far have not been effective, and North Korea has 
scoffed at them.  China, which holds the key to deciding the 
intensity of sanctions, was angry about the first nuclear test, 
calling it a "reckless" act.  But following the second nuclear test, 
the Chinese government in foreign ministerial talks in Hanoi, 
Vietnam (only) said it would "objectively monitor the situation." 
North Korea is believed to have given the U.S. and Chinese 
governments advance notice of its nuclear test.  This means that 
North Korea is hoping to resume talks with Washington by playing a 
strategic game. 
 
Although South Korea is under desperate threat from North Korea's 
possession of nuclear weapons and intercontinental ballistic 
missiles, there is no way for the ROK to take substantial 
countermeasures against North Korea's nuclear and missile threats 
because Seoul is bound by the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the 
Missile Technology Control Regime, and the ROK-U.S. Memorandum of 
Understanding on missiles.  North Korea claims its rationale for 
having nuclear weapons is to defend itself.  Under North Korea's 
nuclear and missile threat, the ROK now needs "deterrence for 
self-defense."  If the day comes when the republic and the lives of 
its citizens are threatened, we must confront the problems posed by 
North Korea's nuclear weapons and ICBMs by realizing that we can no 
longer accept the limitations of international treaties. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
REAFFIRMING EFFORTS TO RESOLVE THE N. KOREA NUCLEAR ISSUE 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, May 26, 2009, Page 23) 
 
North Korea pushed through with an underground nuclear test 
yesterday morning.  Its brinkmanship strategy has reached new 
heights and has been getting stronger over the last couple of months 
with the termination of the nuclear disablement process and the 
restart of fuel rod reprocessing.  If the situation does not change, 
it could lead to additional provocations. 
 
This nuclear test was not unexpected.  North Korea issued a warning 
through a Foreign Ministry Spokesperson's statement on April 29 that 
it would conduct a nuclear test, test launch an intercontinental 
ballistic missile or build a light water reactor.  At the time, 
North Korea placed unrealistic conditions on its threat, demanding 
an immediate apology from the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 
for issuing a president's statement condemning North Korea's rocket 
launch.  It used this to justify pushing through with the nuclear 
test.  Nevertheless, yesterday's nuclear test seemed sudden.  More 
than anything, the timing seemed sudden.  Experts had been 
predicting it would conduct the test sometime after June or July. 
 
As a result of North Korea's nuclear test and its failure to heed 
the international community's unanimous warnings, discussion of 
sanctions have now become unavoidable.  The test was a direct 
violation of UNSC Resolution 1718 which was adopted after North 
Korea's first nuclear test in October 2006.  The resolution condemns 
that test, and imposes sanctions and strict demands on North Korea 
not to conduct further nuclear tests.  Despite full awareness of 
these demands, North Korea conducted a nuclear test anyway.  It is 
appropriate for North Korea to now take responsibility. 
 
It is also time to take a serious look at how the situation has 
developed to this point.  Although the Barack Obama Administration 
has adopted a big picture approach favoring comprehensive direct 
 
SEOUL 00000826  010 OF 014 
 
 
negotiations with North Korea, it has dragged its feet over coming 
up with specific measures.  One could say that North Korea's rocket 
launch has a negative effect on U.S. policies, but it is also true 
that the U.S.'s relaxed attitude contributed to aggravating the 
situation.  In particular, several members of the U.S. government 
have been demonstrating an attitude of benign neglect, believing 
that once North Korea has played all its cards, it would come (to 
the table) for talks.  This means that the U.S. seemed to consider 
the nuclear test as an established fact, and not a thing to be 
prevented through negotiations. 
 
It is clear that one of the major objectives in North Korea's pledge 
to strengthen its nuclear deterrent is to boost its negotiating 
strength.  However, negotiations to resolve the North Korea nuclear 
issue cannot happen without effort.  An appropriate framework for 
talks is needed and participating nations need to possess firm 
intentions.  An approach of benign neglect that is not accompanied 
by a comprehensive plan makes launching negotiations difficult. 
Waiting indefinitely is not a satisfactory approach.  Things become 
difficult to reverse once measures are taken that make the situation 
worse. 
 
Efforts to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue have now reached a 
clear turning point.  We need to move quickly towards putting a 
concrete negotiating plan together in place of empty rhetoric (that 
calls for) negotiations combined with pressure on North Korea.  In 
particular, efforts need to be made before next month's summit 
between South Korea and the U.S.  The U.S. must act immediately 
after it has finished reviewing and developing its new North Korea 
policy, and South Korea must regain a leading role in efforts to 
resolve the nuclear issue and inter-Korean relations.  Everyone 
loses if they just stand on the sidelines and neglect the situation 
like they are doing now. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
IS N. KOREA DETERMINED TO LIVE WITH NUKES? 
(Dong-a Ilbo, May 26, 2009, Page 31) 
 
North Korea conducted its second nuclear test yesterday, a 
provocation which violates an inter-Korean agreement on 
denuclearization, a Six-Party agreement, and U.N. Security Council 
Resolution 1718.  After the test, Pyongyang said, "This will 
contribute to guaranteeing peace and security on the Korean 
Peninsula and its neighboring region."  It is loathsome to hear the 
North's argument after such risky actions.   In addition to the 
nuclear test, (North Korea) also launched missiles. 
 
The latest nuclear test displayed Pyongyang's clear intention to 
become a major military power by 2012 on the basis of its 
"military-first" policy.  Yesterday's test came after the North's 
launch of its Taepodong-2 missile last month.  The North's next step 
is clear: reducing the size of a nuclear weapon in order to load it 
onto a missile. 
 
The Russian Defense Ministry said the North's nuclear explosion had 
a force of 20 kilotons, 40 times bigger than Pyongyang's test three 
years ago.  Admittedly, the North has become a bigger threat but it 
is hugely mistaken if it believes it can wield power over the 
international community.  The world cannot tolerate Pyongyang's 
nuclear development indefinitely.  U.S. President Barack Obama said, 
"North Korea is directly and recklessly challenging the 
international community. North Korea will not find international 
acceptance unless it abandons the pursuit of weapons of mass 
destruction and their means of delivery."  The South Korean 
government issued a statement through the National Security Council 
calling the test an "unacceptable provocation." 
 
South Korea must learn from what happened between the North's first 
nuclear test in 2006 and this one.  The U.N. Security Council passed 
a resolution imposing sanctions on the North, but failed to prevent 
another test.  The Six-Party Talks have been useless.  The United 
 
SEOUL 00000826  011 OF 014 
 
 
States and the international community must recognize that they 
cannot prevent the North's nuclear armament through talks.  Seoul, 
Washington and other Six-Party participants must cooperate closely 
and set a specific action plan.  China and Russia must regret their 
failure to block the nuclear test because they lowered their 
(Security Council) responses after North Korea's last rocket 
provocation to presidential statements, and must do their best to 
promote global peace as permanent members of the U.S. Security 
Council. 
 
Pyongyang seems to believe that it can maintain its authoritarian 
system with nuclear weapons.  But North Korean leader Kim Jong-il 
and his ruling elite must realize that pouring money into nuclear 
weapons and missile development without caring for their hungry 
people will lead to their country collapsing from internal factors. 
 
In South Korea, the country needs more than bipartisan efforts at a 
time when national security is threatened.  But the main opposition 
Democratic Party has regrettably issued a statement blaming the 
latest nuclear test on the Lee Myung-bak Administration's Cold 
War-like policy toward North Korea.  However, North Korea conducted 
its first nuclear test during the (previous) Roh Moo-hyun 
Administration.  How can it be explained?  It is an irresponsible 
political offensive to blame North Korea's nuclear test, a grave 
threat to security, on the (current) South Korean government. 
 
* We have compared the English version on the website with the 
Korean version and added the last three sentences to make them 
identical. 
 
 
WASHINGTON MUST TAKE INITIATIVE TO SAVE KOREA-U.S. FTA 
(Chosun Ilbo, May 25, 2009, Page 35) 
 
Referring to the Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, Korean Trade 
Minister Kim Jong-hoon said on Friday, "The U.S. side must offer a 
solution first, and it should be one that we can accept and does not 
damage the existing balance of gains for both sides."  Kim added, 
"It does not make sense to try to make amends to the agreement 
already settled by both sides.  It is up to the U.S. government, 
which raised the issue, to decide on what should be done outside of 
the agreement." 
 
As Kim said, it is up to the U.S. government to resolve the problems 
surrounding ratifying the Korea-U.S. free trade agreement, which has 
been gathering dust for two years since it was first agreed in April 
2007, and putting the agreement into effect.  Braving physical 
clashes between ruling and opposition parties, a standing committee 
at the Korean National Assembly passed the bilateral free trade pact 
and submitted it to the plenary session of parliament for 
ratification.  But in the United States, the FTA has not yet even 
been presented before Congress. 
 
Until now, the U.S. Congress and the Administration of President 
Barack Obama have been seeking a renegotiation of the bilateral 
pact, claiming that the results of trade negotiations in beef and 
automobiles were disadvantageous to American industries.  But 
recently, the U.S. Meat Export Federation said it would not ask 
Congress to reopen beef talks with Korea.  And the U.S. auto 
industry, which is turning to government aid for survival after 
being driven to bankruptcy due to "excessive" welfare benefits for 
its unionized workers and irresponsible management, is in no 
position to complain that the FTA with Korea is unfair. 
 
Fortunately, there are signs of change within the United States. 
President Obama told Korea's Ambassador to Washington Han Duck-soo 
that the trade pact with Korea, the seventh-largest U.S. trading 
partner, would strengthen and promote prosperity for the people of 
both countries.  It was a shift from the stance President Obama 
demonstrated while running for presidency.  At that time, he 
referred to the pact as being unfair to American automotive 
companies.  U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk also said recently 
that expanded trade through already-signed and new free trade 
agreements is needed, in order for the U.S. and global economies to 
 
SEOUL 00000826  012 OF 014 
 
 
recover quickly.  It is now time for the United States to put those 
words into action and realize the principles of free trade. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
SUMMIT SHOULD SEEK PROGRESS IN KOREA-US FTA 
(Dong-a Ilbo, May 23, 2009, Page 27) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama said in a meeting with Korean Ambassador 
to Washington Han Duck-soo Wednesday that a free trade agreement 
with Korea, the seventh-largest U.S. trading partner, will 
strengthen and promote prosperity for the people of both countries. 
At a summit in London last month, President Obama also expressed his 
strong desire to make progress in concluding free trade agreements. 
Although he has talked about principles, the President's comments 
suggest that he has significantly changed his attitude toward free 
trade given his previous negative comments about the Korea-U.S. 
deal. 
 
The atmosphere is also improving on U.S. beef imports, a major 
stumbling block in congressional ratification of the accord.  Joel 
Haggard, Senior Vice President of the U.S. Meat Export Federation, 
complained that the sale of U.S. beef in Korea has not met his 
expectations, but his attitude was softer than in the past.  The 
change of attitude will likely help facilitate the congressional 
approval process. 
 
It is premature to be optimistic, however.  Quite a few officials in 
the Obama Administration and Congress say the Korea-U.S. accord is 
unfavorable to the U.S. car industry.  House Trade Subcommittee 
Chairman Sandy Levin and House Committee on Ways and Means Chairman 
Charles Rangel say they will not move a step forward without 
resolving automotive trade issues.  Tim Reif, General Counsel for 
the (Office of the) U.S. Trade Representative, holds a similar view. 
 
 
Revising the free trade agreement is unacceptable for Korea.  The 
two countries can, however, consider ways to seek a mutually 
beneficial solution by making additional deals without changing the 
existing agreement.  Korean Trade Minister Kim Jong-hoon said 
yesterday, "There is no rewriting the agreement that has already 
been signed."  He also noted, however, that Washington should first 
propose a new solution acceptable to Korea and something that does 
not hurt the balance of interest that has been reached. 
 
The trade committee of Korea`s National Assembly has approved the 
agreement for deliberation at the main parliamentary session. 
Washington should also try to advance ratification, which will 
promote bilateral trade, employment and alliance. 
 
The June 16 Korea-U.S. summit in Washington is an opportunity for 
the two allies to take a big step toward ratifying the trade pact 
and putting it into force.  Seoul should also continue to take full 
advantage of its diplomatic and private channels to help facilitate 
congressional ratification of the agreement. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
U.S. CONFIRMS INTENTION TO "SELL GLOBAL HAWK TO ROK" 
(Dong-a Ilbo, May 23, 2009, Page 8; Excerpts) 
 
By Reporter Yoon Sang-ho 
 
The U.S. has decided to sell the Global Hawk Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAV) to the ROK, but the ROK military authorities have 
decided to delay purchasing them, drawing attention to the reason 
why. 
 
SEOUL 00000826  013 OF 014 
 
 
 
According to a military source, the U.S. Department of Defense 
delivered its final decision to sell the Global Hawk vehicles to the 
ROK during the 22nd Security Policy Initiative (SPI) meeting, which 
was held in Washington on May 14.  This U.S. stance on this issue 
stands in stark contrast to its position during the Roh Moo-hyun 
Administration.  In June, 2005, when the ROK Ministry of National 
Defense expressed its intention to buy the Global Hawk system for 
independent intelligence gathering after the transfer of wartime 
operational control, the U.S. did not approve the sale out of 
concern about key technology leakage.  Since then, officials of the 
Defense Ministry and the Defense Acquisition Program Administration 
have repeatedly asked the U.S. to sell the system, but the U.S. has 
not budged an inch. 
 
The main reason for that was the rocky relationship between the ROK 
and the U.S. during the Roh Administration.  However, after 
President Lee Myung-bak took office and started to restore the 
health of the alliance with the U.S., Washington began displaying a 
different attitude. 
 
This time, however, the ROK military has postponed introducing the 
Global Hawk vehicle until 2015.  Instead, it has decided to develop 
mid-altitude UAVs on its own.  The ROK military leadership 
reportedly said that since the U.S. will provide the ROK with 
sufficient intelligence on North Korea even after the transfer of 
the wartime operational control, the ROK does not need to buy the 
Global Hawk system.  However, some observers say that the ROK 
military should accelerate the introduction of the system because 
the deployment of the mid-altitude UAV is not possible until 2015, 
and it is not guaranteed that the U.S. will share all intelligence 
on the North with the ROK. 
 
 
KIM JONG-IL NEEDS NUCLEAR WEAPONS NOT FOR NEGOTIATIONS BUT FOR 
SURVIVAL 
(JoongAng Ilbo, May 26, 2009, Page 3; Excerpts) 
 
By Senior Columnist Kim Young-hie 
 
News Analysis 
 
Judging from the fact that North Korea is putting two U.S. reporters 
on trial and has conducted nuclear test and missile launches at the 
same time, even the severest sanctions, such as the freeze on North 
Korea's bank account at Banco Delta Asia in 2006, will not make the 
North give up its plan to sustain the regime through nuclear 
possession. 
 
It seems that after North Korean leader Kim Jong-il suffered health 
problems last summer, the North Korean military authorities gained a 
much bigger voice (over internal affairs) and, as a result, the 
North Korean policy of resorting to nuclear possession as a means of 
regime survival overrode a policy (originally) approved by Kim 
Jong-il to implement the denuclearization agreements and normalize 
diplomatic ties with the U.S. 
 
It appears certain that Kim Jong-il is preparing to transfer power 
to his third son Jong-un.  It is not sure yet what position Jong-un 
will hold when Kim Jong-il is no longer able to rule the communist 
state.  However, it is possible to predict that Kim Jong-il may have 
judged that leaving his son a nation armed with nuclear weapons and 
long-range missiles is a much safer strategy for survival than 
trying to improve and normalize ties with the ROK, the U.S. and 
Japan. 
 
Strong sanctions against North Korea through the UN Security Council 
are essential.  Now, the UNSC has no choice but to seek all possible 
sanctions within its power.  Complementary sanctions by individual 
nations, such as Japan, are also necessary.  What is most important 
here is China's participation in sanctions.  At the ROK-U.S. summit 
in June, cooperation with China should be intensively discussed. 
 
Even if North Korea is on the way to becoming a full-fledged nuclear 
 
SEOUL 00000826  014 OF 014 
 
 
state, are inter-Korean talks worth pursuing?  The answer is "Yes." 
The nuclear issue is part of inter-Korean relations.  Establishing 
inter-Korean ties, which go beyond the nuclear issue to cover a 
broader range of Korean issues, should be the basis of Seoul's new 
policy toward North Korea. 
 
While continuously seeking dialogue with North Korea, the ROK should 
also discuss with Washington how to maintain and strengthen the 
U.S.'s nuclear umbrella over the ROK and how to use the Missile 
Defense systems of the U.S. and Japan.  Meanwhile, from a long- and 
mid-term perspective, the ROK should consider establishing its own 
missile defense system, which could shoot down North Korea's 
short-range missiles, based on cooperation with the U.S. and China's 
understanding. 
 
 
STEPHENS
</file>