^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1835 | 2009-11-19 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 19일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001835

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84271|서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 19일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/05/19 04:03//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
오바마 '강해진 중국'을 직면하다

중앙일보, 한국일보, 세계일보, 모든 텔레비전
그랜드 바겐 '입' 맞추고…한미 FTA '기분'만 맞출 듯

동아일보
은행장 후보, 금융당국이 사전 심사

한겨레 신문
'4대강 수정론' 여당서 확산

서울신문
"알만한 기업들 세종시 이전 굳혀"

===== 국내 동향 =====

이명박과 버락 오바마 대통령은 19일 북핵과 한미 FTA를 비롯해 내년에 있을 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의를 위한 협력 방안을 논의하기 위해 정상회담을 개최할 예정이다.(전체)

청와대 고위 관계자는 오늘 정상회담에서 답보 상태의 북핵 문제 해결을 위해 단호한 대북 메시지를 발표할 예정이라고 18일 말했다. (한겨레)

한국 정부는 오바마의 방한 기간 중에 철통 보안을 보장하기 위해 군인과 경찰 1만3000명을 동원하였다. 외국 손님의 안전을 위해 동원된 경호 대기팀 1만3000명은 역대 최고 수준이다. (전체)

한나라당과 민주당은 18일 버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 방한을 환영했다. 양당은 한미 정상회담이 북핵 문제와 답보 상태의 한미 자유무역협정(FTA) 비준 문제 해결의 계기가 돼야 한다는 입장을 밝혔다. 반면 소수 야당 자유선진당은 방한한 오바마의 짮은 체류 시간에 실망감을 표명하였다. (중앙, 동아, [[http://www.kinds.or.kr/search/totalSearchView.do?news_id=01101101.20091119100001950|한국]], 서울)

===== 미디어 분석 =====
==== 오바마 대통령 방한 ====

한국의 모든 언론은 1면과 내부 지면을 할애해 당일 이명박 대통령과 오바마 대통령 간의 한미 정상회담 소식을 다루었다. 대다수 언론은 양국 정상이 북핵과 한미 FTA를 비롯해 내년에 있을 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의를 위한 협력 방안에 초점을 맞출 것으로 기대했다.

중도 우파 중앙일보와 좌파 성향 한겨레 신문은 당일 한미 정상회담에서 단호한 대북 메시지가 발표될 예정이라는 고위 청와대 관계자의 발언을 전했다. 보수 동아일보는 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책특별대표의 방북은 북한과의 실질적인 협상을 위한 것이 아니라 북한을 6자 회담에 조속히 나오게 하는 것이 목적이라는 점을 오바마 대통령이 직접 설명할 예정이라는 정상회담과 밀접한 소식통의 발언을 전했다.

보수 조선일보는 <오바마의 '외교 삼국지'… 중(中)엔 밀착, 일(日)과 꺼끌, 한국(韓國)은 편안>란 제하의 내부 지면 기사에서 "일본 방문에서는 아시아 순방의 첫 방문국이었지만 이미 합의한 내용의 수정 여부를 놓고 갈등해야 했었고, 중국에서는 티벳 등 인권 문제를 불쾌하지 않게 가볍게 넘어가면서 중국에 호의적인 모습을 어필했지만, 한국에서는 어떤 장면이 벌어질지 지켜볼 일이다"고 전했다.

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설: "현재 한·미 간에 북핵 해법을 둘러싼 이견은 없어 보인다. …정부는 그랜드 바긴이든 미국의 포괄적 해법이든 크게 다르지 않다고 밝혀 왔다. …그러나 북핵 협상이 본격화되면 구체적 사안마다 한·미 간에도 고비가 없을 수 없다. 지난 20년의 핵 협상 과정이 그랬었다. 이번 회담에서 이명박 대통령과 오바마 대통령이 주력해야 할 과제는 바로 그런 일을 최소화하는 것이다. 두 정상 간 만남은 이번이 세 번째다. 허심탄회한 논의가 가능할 것이다."

다음과 같은 제목의 기사가 신문에 실렸다: <한·미 동맹 업그레이드 열쇠는 '북핵·FTA'> (보수 조선일보); <오바마, 한·미 FTA비준 의지 보일까>(중앙일보); <오바마 미 대통령 방한/ 그랜드바겐 '입' 맞추고… 한미 FTA '기분'만 맞출 듯> (중도 한국일보)

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설] 미·중 북핵 이견, 한·미 ‘찰떡 공조’로 넘어야**(중앙일보, 2009년 11월 19일, 34면)

북한 핵 문제 해법을 둘러싸고 미·중 정상이 뚜렷한 시각 차이를 드러냈다. 17일 양국 정상회담 직후 열린 기자회견에서 버락 오바마 미 대통령은 “북한은 대항과 도발의 길, 국제사회의 일원이 되는 두 길 사이에서 선택의 기로에 서 있으며 도발을 계속하면 고립될 것”이라고 강력한 경고 메시지를 던졌다. 그러나 후진타오(胡錦濤) 중국 국가주석은 “대화와 협상으로 해결해야 한다”고 말해 강조점이 달랐다. 북핵 문제에 관한 두 나라의 입장 차이는 어제오늘의 일이 아니다. 그러나 이번처럼 한자리에서 극명하게 대조되는 입장이 표명된 적은 드물다. 더욱이 북한을 6자회담에 복귀시키기 위해 미국이 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표를 평양에 파견하기로 한 시점에 불거진 일이다. 그만큼 국제사회의 북핵 문제 다루기는 앞으로도 우여곡절을 겪을 것으로 우려된다.

우리 정부의 중국 설득 노력에 한층 부담이 생겼다. 현재 한·미 간에 북핵 해법을 둘러싼 이견은 없어 보인다. 이명박 대통령이 천명한 그랜드 바긴 해법을 두고 미 정부 일각에서 불만스러워한 기색이 있었지만 지금은 말끔히 해소됐다. 오바마 대통령이 아시아 순방길에 오르기 직전 “이명박 대통령과 포괄적 해결의 필요성에 대해 완전히 의견이 일치한다”고 밝혔기 때문이다. 19일 열리는 한·미 정상회담에서 두 정상은 이 같은 입장을 재확인하고 북한에 대해 강력한 핵 포기 촉구 메시지를 던질 것으로 보인다. 그러나 두 정상의 논의가 이에 그쳐선 안 된다.

정부는 그랜드 바긴이든 미국의 포괄적 해법이든 크게 다르지 않다고 밝혀 왔다. 예전처럼 북핵 폐기 과정이 중도에 좌절되지 않아야 한다는 목표를 공유한다는 것이다. 그러나 북핵 협상이 본격화되면 구체적 사안마다 한·미 간에도 고비가 없을 수 없다. 지난 20년의 핵 협상 과정이 그랬었다.

이번 회담에서 이명박 대통령과 오바마 대통령이 주력해야 할 과제는 바로 그런 일을 최소화하는 것이다. 두 정상 간 만남은 이번이 세 번째다. 허심탄회한 논의가 가능할 것이다. 한·미 간 ‘찰떡 공조’의 기틀을 다지는 데 힘을 쏟아야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 오바마 대통령의 첫 방한에 거는 기대**(한국일보, 11월 18일, 39면)

오바마 미국 대통령이 취임 후 첫 아시아 순방의 마지막 여정으로 어제 서울에 왔다. 이명박 대통령과 오바마 대통령은 오늘 정상회담을 갖고 북핵 공조와 한미 FTA 비준, 내년 11월 G20 정상회의의 성공적 개최를 위한 협력 방안 등을 논의한다. 두 정상의 만남은 세 번째이지만, 미국과 세계의 역사를 새로 쓰고 있는 오바마 대통령의 방한은 각별한 의미가 있다. 국민과 함께 그를 진심으로 환영하며, 이번 방문을 통해 두 나라가 우호협력 관계를 더욱 굳게 다지기를 기대한다.

오바마 대통령은 부시 공화당 정부와 달리 다자간 대화와 협력, 특히 상대를 배려하는 외교를 표방하고 있다. 오늘 한미 정상회담에서도 그러한 자세로 주요 현안을 논의할 것으로 믿는다. 특히 한반도 평화와 안정에 직결되는 북핵 문제 논의 결과를 주목한다.

그제 미중 정상회담에서 오바마 대통령과 후진타오 주석은 한 목소리로 북한의 조속한 6자 회담 복귀를 촉구했다. 한미 두 나라 정상은 더욱 일관된 자세를 보일 것이다. 다만 북한을 핵 폐기 협상에 다시 불러내려면 압박만으로는 부족하다. 보다 진전된 대북 제안을 기대한다.

한미 FTA 비준 문제는 이번 정상회담에서 매듭 짓기 바란다. 이를 위해서는 어느 때보다 성의 있는 대화가 필요하다. 오바마 대통령은 미국 자동차산업의 이해를 의식해서 비준 처리에 소극적이었다. 이번 방한을 통해 한국의 입장을 좀더 깊이 헤아리고 전향적인 자세를 취할 것으로 기대한다.

한국을 처음 방문한 오바마 대통령의 체류시간이 만 하루도 되지 않아, "동맹국을 너무 소홀히 여긴 게 아니냐"는 지적도 나온다. 앞서 일본과 중국에서는 체류시간이 훨씬 길고, 대학생들과의 대화와 대중 연설 등 다양한 행사를 가진 것과 비교된다. 한국인들에게도 큰 감동을 준 오바마 대통령의 첫 방문이 짧은 것은 아쉽다. 그러나 진지한 논의를 통해 상호 신뢰를 쌓는 것이 더욱 중요하다. 두 정상이 한국민의 높은 기대를 헤아려 큰 결실을 내놓기 바란다.

===== 특집 =====

**오바마 첫 방한… 오늘 李대통령과 세번째 정상회담; 북핵 그랜드바겐 - FTA 진전 중점 논의**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 19일, 1면)

정용관 기자

이명박 대통령과 버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 19일 오전 청와대에서 한미 정상회담을 열고 북핵 해법과 한미 자유무역협정(FTA) 진전 방안 등 양국 현안을 논의한다.

두 정상은 이번 회담에서 이 대통령이 제안한 북핵 ‘그랜드 바겐(Grand Bargain)’ 구상, 즉 일괄타결 방안의 구체적인 실행 방안에 대해 긴밀하게 논의할 것이라고 청와대가 18일 설명했다. 

또 두 정상은 2007년 9월 협상 타결 이후 양국 의회 비준 과정에서 교착상태에 빠져 있는 한미 FTA의 진전 방안에 대해서도 의견을 교환할 예정이다. 이 대통령은 협정 서명 후 2년이 지난 만큼 FTA의 조속한 발효가 필요하다는 점을 강조할 것으로 전해졌다.

두 정상은 아울러 내년 11월 서울에서 열리는 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의의 성공적 개최를 위한 협력 방안과 기후변화 대책 협력 방안 등도 논의한다. 그러나 청와대는 이번 회담에서 한국군의 아프가니스탄 파병과 2012년 4월로 예정돼 있는 한미 전시작전통제권 전환 문제는 의제에 포함되지 않는다고 밝혔다. 두 정상은 공동선언문 대신 공동기자회견을 통해 회담 내용을 설명할 예정이다.

두 정상은 올해 4월 영국 런던 G20 정상회의에서 첫 양자회담을 가진 데 이어 6월 미국 워싱턴에서 두 번째 정상회담을 했다. 오바마 대통령은 3박 4일 일정의 중국 방문을 마치고 18일 오후 7시 45분경 경기 평택시 주한미군 오산공군기지를 통해 한국에 입국했다. 오바마 대통령은 19일 정상회담 후 이 대통령과 오찬을 함께하고 주한미군 부대를 방문해 미군 장병을 격려한 뒤 1박 2일의 일정을 마치고 이한한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**李대통령 회담 전략은 ‘FTA 논의 먼저’**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 19일, 4면)

정용관 기자

버락 오바마 미국 대통령을 태운 ‘에어포스 원(미 대통령 전용기)’은 18일 오후 7시 45분 경기 평택시 주한미군 오산공군기지에 내려앉았다. 미국 대통령들은 과거에도 예외 없이 주한미군 공군기지를 통해 한국 땅을 밟았다.

유명환 외교통상부 장관과 한덕수 주미 한국대사 등의 영접을 받은 오바마 대통령은 미군 장병들을 격려한 뒤 곧장 전용 헬기인 ‘머린 원’을 타고 서울로 향했다. 오후 8시 20분경 숙소인 서울 시내의 한 호텔에 도착한 오바마 대통령은 이후 별다른 공식 일정 없이 휴식을 취하며 19일 한미 정상회담 준비를 한 것으로 알려졌다. 이 호텔은 경호상의 편리함 때문에 한국을 방문한 미국 대통령의 숙소로 애용되는 곳이다.

이명박 대통령도 18일 아무런 공식 일정도 잡지 않고 청와대 본관 집무실에서 정상회담 의제를 꼼꼼히 점검했다. 특히 6월 미국 워싱턴을 방문했을 때 공식 영빈관인 블레어하우스에서 묵는 등 환대를 받은 바 있는 이 대통령은 의전과 경호에 한 치의 소홀함이 없도록 만전을 기하라고 지시했다는 후문이다.

이번 정상회담의 핵심 의제는 북핵 문제와 한미 자유무역협정(FTA) 진전 방안이다. 북핵 문제와 관련해 두 정상은 이 대통령이 최근 북핵 해법으로 제안한 그랜드바겐 구상, 즉 일괄타결 방안의 구체적인 방법론을 놓고 의견을 조율할 것으로 예상된다. 오바마 대통령은 이번 아시아 순방 전 ‘그랜드바겐’이라는 용어를 직접 쓰지는 않았지만 “이 대통령과 나는 북핵과 미사일 확산 문제에 대해 ‘포괄적 해결(comprehensive package)’을 이뤄낼 필요성에 완전한 의견 일치를 보고 있다”고 밝힌 바 있다.

오바마 대통령은 북-미 양자대화와 관련해 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책특별대표의 방북은 북한과의 실질적인 협상을 위한 것이 아니라 북한을 6자 회담에 조속히 나오게 하는 것이 목적이라는 점을 직접 설명할 것으로 알려졌다. 두 정상은 6월 정상회담에서 채택한 ‘한미동맹을 위한 공동비전’을 구체화하는 방안도 논의할 것으로 예상된다.

북핵 문제가 장기 해결 과제라면 한미 FTA 진전 방안은 손에 잡히는 이슈다. 이 대통령은 정상회담에서 먼저 FTA 문제를 논의한 뒤 북핵 문제로 넘어갈 것으로 알려졌다. 우리 정부는 상당히 진전된 오바마 대통령의 답변이 나오길 기대하면서도 신중한 태도다. 미국무역대표부(USTR)가 9월 한미 FTA에 대한 관련 산업계의 의견을 조사한 결과 약 90%가 절대 찬성했으며 미국 하원의원 88명이 한미 FTA의 의회 비준 준비를 요구하는 서한을 오바마 대통령에게 전달하는 등 분위기가 무르익고 있다. 하지만 건강보험 개혁 문제 등 미국 내부 사정이 복잡하기 때문에 미 의회의 조속한 비준을 낙관하기 어려운 상황임을 우리 정부도 알고 있다. 따라서 두 정상이 ‘조속한 비준을 위한 노력’이라는 선언적 합의만 밝힐지 그 이상의 구체적인 합의를 도출할지도 이번 정상회담의 주요 포인트가 될 것으로 보인다.

두 정상은 내년 11월 우리나라에서 열리는 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의의 성공적 개최를 위한 협력방안도 논의한다. 또 다음 달 덴마크 코펜하겐에서 열리는 유엔 기후변화협약 총회와 관련해 이 대통령은 우리나라의 국가온실가스 감축 목표치(2020년 배출전망치 대비 30% 감축) 결정을 소개하며 녹색성장 공조 방안을 논의할 것으로 보인다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

중앙일보 영문 기사는 생략((SUMMIT TO SEND NORTH STERN WORDS))

포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 다운로드 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1835.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001835 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 19, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Obama Faces a "Strong China" 
 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, All TVs 
Lee, Obama to Discuss N. Korea, FTA and G20 Summit 
 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Financial Authorities Seek to Pre-Screen Candidates for Bank 
Presidents 
 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Growing Calls in Ruling Party to Revise Controversial "Four-River 
Restoration Project" 
 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
Prime Minister: "Some Highly Recognized Companies Have 90 to 95 
Percent Decided to Move into Sejong City" 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
Presidents Lee Myung-bak and Barack Obama will hold a 
summit today to discuss the North Korean nuclear issue, the KORUS 
FTA and cooperation for next year's Group of 20 summit in Seoul. 
(All) 
 
A senior Blue House official said yesterday that a stern message 
toward North Korea will be issued at today's summit to resolve the 
nuclear impasse. (Hankyoreh) 
 
The ROKG has deployed 13,000 police officers and soldiers to ensure 
tight security during President Obama's visit. The 13,000 personnel 
on standby is the largest number ever mobilized for the security of 
a foreign guest. (All) 
 
The ruling Grand National Party (GNP) and the main opposition 
Democratic Party (DP) welcomed President Obama's visit yesterday, 
saying that the Lee-Obama summit should serve as an opportunity to 
find a way to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue and to advance 
the stalled KORUS FTA. The minor opposition Liberty Forward Party, 
by contrast, expressed disappointment at President Obama's brief 
stay in the ROK. (JoongAng, Dong-a, Hankook, Seoul) 
 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
- President Obama in ROK 
------------------------ 
All ROK media gave front-and inside-page coverage to today's summit 
in Seoul between Presidents Lee Myung-bak and Barack Obama.  Most 
media expected the two leaders to focus on the North Korean nuclear 
issue, the KORUS FTA and cooperation for next year's Group of 20 
summit in Seoul. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo and left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun 
quoted a senior Blue House official as saying yesterday that a stern 
message toward North Korea will be issued at today's summit to 
resolve the nuclear impasse.  Conservative Dong-a Ilbo cited sources 
close to the summit as saying that President Obama will explain that 
the planned visit to Pyongyang by Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth is not designed to begin negotiations 
with North Korea, but to urge Pyongyang's return to the Six-Party 
 
SEOUL 00001835  002 OF 006 
 
 
Talks as soon as possible. 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo carried an inside-page report entitled 
"Obama's Northeast Asia Trip Winds Down in Korea."  It said: 
"President Obama has been on a tour of Japan, China and the ROK, 
apparently with a different agenda in each country.  In Japan, 
although it was his first stop, there was tension over hopes in 
Tokyo to reduce the presence of U.S. troops.  In China, Obama was 
all charm, skipping lightly over unpleasant issues like human rights 
and Tibet.  What happens in the ROK remains to be seen." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "As of now, Seoul and 
Washington show no discord over their approaches to resolving the 
nuclear issue. ...  Seoul says that President Lee's 'grand bargain' 
proposal and the U.S.'s comprehensive resolution are not different. 
...  When the negotiations pick up speed, however, Seoul and 
Washington could again face discord over specific issues.  That has 
been the pattern of the past 20 years.  During today's summit, 
Presidents Lee and Obama must focus on minimizing such concerns. 
This is their third summit, and it is possible for them to open up 
and have candid discussions." 
 
Newspapers carried the following headlines: "N. Korea's Nuclear 
Program, FTA Key to Upgrading ROK-U.S. Alliance" (conservative 
Chosun Ilbo); "Will Obama Show Willingness to Ratify KORUS FTA?" 
(right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo); and "Possibility that Obama May 
Just End up Agreeing in Principle on Early Ratification of KORUS 
FTA" (moderate Hankook Ilbo) 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
OPPORTUNITY FOR RENEWAL 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 19, 2009, Page 34) 
 
The leaders of the United States and China have shown a clear 
difference in their views of the North Korea nuclear issue.  At a 
joint press conference that took place shortly after the U.S.-China 
summit on Tuesday, U.S. President Barack Obama sent a strong warning 
to Pyongyang when he said, "North Korea has a choice: It can 
continue down the path of confrontation and provocation that has led 
to less security, less prosperity and more isolation from the global 
community," Obama said, "or it can choose to become a full member of 
the international community, which will give a better life to its 
people by living up to international obligations and foregoing 
nuclear weapons."  In contrast, Chinese President Hu Jintao said the 
matter should be resolved through dialogue and negotiation.  The 
difference in Washington's and Beijing's positions is nothing new. 
And yet, it is rare to see such a drastic contrast in the midst of a 
single event.  Furthermore, the rift emerged ahead of U.S. special 
envoy Stephen Bosworth's planned trip to North Korea.  This has led 
to increasing concerns that the international community's handling 
of the North Korean nuclear issue will result in additional turmoil. 
 Seoul also faces the greater burden of persuading Beijing. 
 
As of now, Seoul and Washington show no discord over their 
approaches to resolving the nuclear crisis.  Some in the U.S. 
administration were displeased after Lee announced his "grand 
bargain," but the friction is completely gone now.  Ahead of his 
departure to Asia, Obama said, "President Lee and I are in full 
agreement on the need to achieve a comprehensive resolution of the 
nuclear, missile and proliferation problems, and cooperation between 
our two governments is extremely close."  At today's summit, the two 
leaders are expected to reconfirm their positions and issue a strong 
message to North Korea to give up its nuclear arms programs.  This, 
however, cannot be the end of the two leaders' discussion. 
 
Seoul says that President Lee's "grand bargain" proposal and the 
U.S.'s comprehensive are not different.  It said that Seoul and 
Washington share the understanding that the process of dismantling 
the North's nuclear arms must not be hindered.  When the 
negotiations pick up speed, however, Seoul and Washington could 
again face discord over specific issues.  That has been the pattern 
of the past 20 years. 
 
SEOUL 00001835  003 OF 006 
 
 
 
During today's summit, Presidents Lee and Obama must focus on 
minimizing such concerns.  This is their third summit, and it is 
possible for them to open up and have candid discussions.  Both 
leaders should use the summit as an opportunity to strengthen the 
foundation of the South Korea-U.S. alliance for the successful 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
 
EXPECTATIONS FOR PRESIDENT OBAMA'S FIRST VISIT TO ROK 
(Hankook Ilbo, November 19, page 39) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama arrived in Seoul yesterday on the last 
leg of his debut Asian tour.  President Obama will hold a summit 
with President Lee Myung-bak today to discuss the North Korean 
nuclear issue, the Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA), and 
cooperation for next year's Group of G20 summit in the ROK.  Even 
though this is the third meeting between the two leaders, Obama's 
visit to the ROK carries great significance.  President Obama is 
charting a new course for the U.S. and the world.  We welcome him 
heartily and hope that his visit will serve as an opportunity to 
further bolster bilateral cooperation. 
 
Unlike the Bush Administration, President Obama is championing 
multi-lateral talks and cooperation, while extending his hand to 
other countries.  We believe that Obama will take such an attitude 
during the ROK-U.S. summit.  We pay special attention to the outcome 
of their discussions on the North Korean nuclear issue, which is 
directly related to the peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula. 
 During the U.S.-China summit held on November 17, President Obama 
and Chinese President Hu Jintao called on North Korea to return to 
the Six-Party Talks soon.  We expect that the two presidents will 
reaffirm this position more clearly during the summit.  However, 
pressure is not enough to bring Pyongyang back to the nuclear 
disarmament negotiations.  We expect a more advanced proposal on the 
North. 
 
We hope that the ROK-U.S. FTA issue will be completely resolved 
during the upcoming summit.  To this end, sincere dialogue is needed 
more than ever before.  Mindful of the interest of the U.S. auto 
industry, President Obama has been passive about ratifying the trade 
deal.  We expect that through this visit to the ROK, he will 
understand the ROK's position more deeply and make an about-face. 
 
Since President Obama's first visit to Seoul does not last less than 
a day, some observers point out that he pays too little attention to 
the U.S. ally.  In Japan and China, he stayed much longer and 
attended various events, such as dialogue with college students or a 
public speech.  It is regrettable that the first visit by President 
Obama, who deeply impressed Koreans, is too short.  However, what is 
more important is for the two nations to build mutual trust through 
earnest discussions.  We hope that the ROK-U.S. summit will produce 
good results which live up to Koreans' high expectations. 
 
 
Features 
-------- 
 
LEE-OBAMA TALKS TO FOCUS ON NK NUKES, FTA 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 19, 2009, Front Page) 
 
By Reporter Chung Yong-kwan 
 
President Lee Myung-bak and U.S. President Barack Obama will hold a 
summit today in Seoul on North Korea's nuclear threat and 
ratification of the bilateral free trade agreement. 
 
The Korean presidential office of Cheong Wa Dae yesterday said both 
leaders will hold an intense discussion over President Lee's "grand 
bargain" proposal, or a one-step agreement to deal with Pyongyang, 
 
SEOUL 00001835  004 OF 006 
 
 
at the summit. 
 
They will also discuss how to advance ratification of the free trade 
deal, which has stalled since it was signed in September 2007. 
President Lee will urge both sides to ratify and implement the 
accord soon given that two years has passed since the singing of the 
agreement. 
 
The two leaders will also speak on cooperation to combat climate 
change and South Korea's hosting of next year's Group of 20 summit. 
Not to be discussed, however, will be Seoul's dispatch of forces to 
Afghanistan and retaking of wartime operational control from 
Washington in April 2012.  Presidents Lee and Obama will hold a 
joint news conference after the summit instead of releasing a joint 
statement. 
 
The two leaders had their first summit on the sidelines of the G20 
summit in London in April, followed by one in Washington in June. 
After visiting China for four days, Obama arrived at the U.S. Air 
Force base in Osan, south of Seoul, around 7:40 p.m. yesterday. 
Over his two-day visit to South Korea, Obama will hold talks and a 
luncheon with President Lee today.  Obama will head home after 
speaking to U.S. forces stationed in South Korea. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
 
OBAMA ARRIVES FOR 1ST VISIT TO S. KOREA AS PRESIDENT 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 19, 2009, Page 4) 
 
By Reporter Chung Yong-kwan 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama yesterday landed at the U.S. Air Force 
base in Osan, south of Seoul, around 7:40 p.m.  U.S. Presidents have 
landed at the base in Air Force One whenever they visit South Korea. 
 
 
President Obama held small talk with Korean Foreign Minister Yu 
Myung-hwan and Ambassador to Washington Han Duck-soo, who welcomed 
Obama at the base.  Obama then cheered American soldiers and stepped 
into the presidential helicopter Marine One to move to a hotel in 
Seoul.  The hotel has been a favorite of U.S. Presidents visiting 
Seoul due to security issues.  After arriving at the hotel, Obama 
took a rest to prepare himself for his summit with President Lee 
Myung-bak. 
 
President Lee had no official schedule yesterday and instead checked 
the agenda for his bilateral summit at his office.  Because of his 
warm treatment when visiting Washington in June, he ordered his 
staff to pull out all the stops in providing the appropriate 
protocol and security for Obama.  Back in June, President Lee stayed 
at Blair House, the official guesthouse of the U.S. President, in 
Washington. 
 
In today's summit, both leaders plan to put focus on North Korea's 
nuclear program and speeding up the ratification of the South 
Korea-U.S. free trade agreement.  On North Korea, they are expected 
to coordinate their opinions on President Lee's "grand bargain" 
proposal, an initiative to deal with Pyongyang's nuclear program. 
Though Obama failed to mention the grand bargain before his visit to 
Asia, he said, "President Lee and I are in a full agreement on the 
need to achieve a comprehensive package for the nuclear missile and 
proliferation problems." 
 
Sources close to the summit said Obama will explain that the visit 
to Pyongyang by U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy 
Stephen Bosworth is not designed to begin negotiations with North 
Korea, but to urge Pyongyang's return to the Six-Party Talks as soon 
as possible.  The two leaders will also discuss implementing the 
Joint Vision for the ROK-U.S. Alliance adopted at their June summit. 
 
 
 
SEOUL 00001835  005 OF 006 
 
 
A more urgent issue, however, is the ratification of the bilateral 
free trade agreement.  President Lee will discuss the matter first 
and talk about the nuclear issue later.  Though the Korean 
government has high expectations for a positive response from Obama, 
it has taken a careful approach. A survey of U.S. industries on the 
agreement conducted by the U.S. Trade Representative said around 90 
percent fully back the deal.  Eighty-eight U.S. congressmen have 
also sent a letter to Obama urging faster action on the accord. 
Seoul, however, is well aware that the U.S. Senate is unlikely to 
ratify the deal soon because of complicated issues such as health 
care reform.  Accordingly, it remains to be seen whether the two 
leaders will just declare that they will strive to get the deal 
ratified as soon as possible or reach agreement on detailed plans. 
 
They will also discuss South Korea's hosting of the Group of 20 
summit in November next year.  Another agenda item is the U.N. 
Climate Conference in Denmark next month.  President Lee will say 
Korea will cut CO2 emissions 30 percent by 2020 and discuss 
cooperation in green growth with Obama. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
 
SUMMIT TO SEND NORTH STERN WORDS 
(JoongAng Daily, November 19, 2009, Front Page) 
 
By Reporter Ser Myo-ja 
 
"Grand bargain" can only come after Pyongyang returns to Six-Party 
Talks 
 
A stern message toward North Korea to resolve the nuclear impasse 
will be issued at the summit of President Lee Myung-bak and U.S. 
President Barack Obama today, a senior Blue House official said 
yesterday. 
 
After wrapping up his visit to China, Obama arrived here yesterday 
evening, landing at the U.S. Forces Korea's air base in Osan, south 
of Seoul.  South Korea is the last stop on Obama's nine-day Asian 
tour.  Anticipation was running high yesterday that today's summit 
between Lee and Obama will propel both leaders to push their 
legislatures to complete the Korea-U.S. free trade agreement. 
 
Beyond North Korea and the FTA, climate change and U.S. cooperation 
in Seoul's hosting of the G-20 summit next November will also be on 
the table.  Blue House officials said President Lee spent much of 
yesterday preparing for the summit, going over the main agenda items 
with key aides. 
 
The summit follows Washington's decision to send a special envoy to 
North Korea to discuss Pyongyang's possible return to the stalled 
six-nation nuclear talks.  Lee and Obama are also meeting days after 
a naval skirmish between the two Koreas in the Yellow Sea. 
 
Lee's North Korea policy architect said yesterday that Lee and Obama 
will discuss what they can offer within the so-called grand bargain 
proposal. 
 
"North Korea has not returned to the Six-Party Talks yet," Kim 
Tae-hyo, Lee's secretary for national strategy, told YTN yesterday. 
"At this point, Lee and Obama are expected to discuss how they can 
work together to create a package deal to be offered to the North in 
return for its nuclear dismantlement.  Furthermore, they will 
discuss how to coordinate it with Japan, China and Russia, and how 
the North will react to it.  The Lee-Obama summit will also serve as 
an opportunity to discuss the blueprint of the deal depending on the 
North's reaction." 
 
"Only after the North returns to the six-nation talks can we make an 
offer, and the North can react," Kim said.  "At this point, it is 
important for North Korea to decide to give up its nuclear arms 
programs.  It is inappropriate to discuss what the international 
 
SEOUL 00001835  006 OF 006 
 
 
community will offer inside the grand bargain while the North hides 
the core parts of its nuclear program.  To this end, a stern message 
will be sent to the North through the Lee-Obama summit." 
 
Lee and Obama will also discuss the FTA, signed in 2007.  It would 
liberalize bilateral trade between the two countries.  Leaders of 
Korea's major business lobbies, including the Federation of Korean 
Industries, visited the National Assembly yesterday to urge 
lawmakers to ratify the deal as soon as possible.  The summit also 
follows a bipartisan move in the U.S. Congress urging Obama to 
quickly submit the ratification bill. 
 
Park Sun-kyoo, Lee's spokesman, said the Blue House also geared up 
to provide the best possible security for Obama, who is visiting 
Korea for the first time. Lee personally chose gifts for the U.S. 
president.  "Because Obama learned taekwondo when he was (an 
Illinois state) senator, a taekwondo uniform, a black belt and an 
honorary certificate will be presented to him as presidential 
gifts," Park said. 
 
Although the U.S. first lady is not accompanying the American 
president this time, a Korean cookbook in English will also be 
delivered for Michelle Obama, Park said.  After summit meetings this 
morning, Lee and Obama will jointly address the press.  But no joint 
statement will be issued to summarize the summit. 
 
Following the press conference, the two will have lunch at the 
presidential guesthouse of Sangchunjae inside the Blue House. 
According to other Blue House officials, a traditional Korean meal 
of bulgogi, japchae and other dishes will be served along with 
California wine. 
 
While the ruling party welcomed Obama, opposition parties were split 
over his first trip to Korea. 
 
"I have seen footage of the two leaders (in a previous meeting) on 
TV.  As I saw them standing close, whispering to each other, I had 
an impression that they have built a deep friendship and trust on a 
personal level," said Chung Mong-joon, the Grand National Party 
Chairman.  The Democratic Party's Chairman Chung Sye-kyun also said 
the Lee-Obama summit should serve as an opportunity to find a way to 
resolve the nuclear crisis. 
 
In contrast, Lee Hoi-chang, head of the conservative opposition 
Liberty Forward Party, expressed disappointment at Obama's scheduled 
itinerary in Korea. 
 
"Obama attended a series of events in Japan and participated in a 
debate with university students in China," Lee said.  "And yet, he 
is only staying 24 hours in Korea and had no special plans other 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>