^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1705  |  2009년 10월 27일  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 27일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001705

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 27일
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/21 20:26//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
신종플루, 학교를 덮치다;최근 감염 80%가 10代 이하… 어제 초·중학생 3명 등 5명 사망

중앙일보
정부, 특전사 포함 정예 300명 아프간 파견 검토

동아일보, 한국일보, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
신종플루 급속 확산 비상; 신종플루 하루 5명 사망

한겨레 신문
아프간에 군·경찰 파견 검토/유명환 외교 "재건 돕는 민간요원 보호위해"

===== 국내 동향 =====

유명환 외교통상부 장관이 어제 국회에서 아프가니스탄 재건사업에 투입되는 민간 전문요원을 보호하기 위해 경비 병력을 파견할 방침이라고 밝혔다. (전체)

한국 정부 소식통은 관련 소식으로 군을 보낼지 경찰을 보낼지 버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 방한(다음달 18일) 이전에 결정이 내려질 거라고 말했다. 특전사 소속 등 300명 규모의 정예 부대를 파견하는 방안도 유력한 옵션이다. (중앙)

한국 정부는 26일 인도적 원조의 형태로 북한에 옥수수 1만톤 지원을 제의했다. 이번 대북 원조는 상대적으로 적은 양의 원조이다. 북측이 이를 수용할 경우 이명박 정부 출범 후 첫 대북 식량 지원 사례가 된다. (전체)

주한미군을 이라크나 아프가니스탄에 배치하는 것을 검토 중이라는 10월 22일 마이클 멀린 미국 합참의장(해군 대장)의 발언과 관련해 한국 국방부는 26일 한미 양국은 병력 재배치에 대해 논의한 바 없다고 말했다. (동아)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 아프간 원조 ====

모든 한국 언론은 유명환 외교부 장관이 26일 국회 외통위 회의에서 발언한 내용에 대해 보도하였다. 그는 아프가니스탄 재건사업을 위해 적어도 130명의 민간 전문요원을 파견함에 더해 그들을 보호하기 위해 군이나 경찰의 파견을 검토 중이라고 말했다. 유 외교부 장관의 발언 내용: "한국 정부는 아프가니스탄 지방재건팀 프로그램의 일환으로 의료, 직업훈련, 경찰 훈련 프로그램을 확대할 계획이다. 현재 한국 민간인은 미군의 보호를 받고 있다. 그러나 지방재건팀이 확대되면 우리 스스로 우리 노동자를 보호할 필요가 있다."

중앙일보는 관련 소식으로 군을 보낼지 경찰을 보낼지 버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 방한(다음달 18일) 이전에 결정이 내려질 것이며 특전사 소속 등 300명 규모의 정예 부대를 파견하는 방안도 유력한 옵션이라는 한국 정부 소식통의 발언을 전했다.

==== 주한미군 중동 배치 가능성 ====

보수 동아일보는 주한미군을 이라크나 아프가니스탄에 배치하는 것을 검토 중이라는 10월 22일 마이클 멀린 미국 합참의장(해군 대장)의 발언과 관련해 한국 국방부는 26일 한미 양국은 병력 재배치에 대해 논의한 바 없다고 말했다. 동아일보의 해당 기사 제목: <한-미 엇박자? 이동배치 신호탄?>

동아일보가 사설에서 주장한 내용: "미국이 아프간 병력을 늘리면 불가피하게 해외주둔 미군이 영향을 받는다. …주한미군이 아프간으로 차출돼 한반도에 안보 공백이 초래되는 일이 없도록 하기 위해서도 한국은 아프간 평화 정착을 적극적으로 도와야 한다. 우리는 베트남전쟁 당시 주한 미군의 감축을 막기 위해 베트남에 파병한 경험도 있다. …특히 미국이 원하는 경찰과 군대 육성 지원은 아프간의 조속한 안정을 위해 절대적으로 필요하다."

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설: "한·미 간 약속에 따라 미국이 주한미군을 활용하는 것을 무작정 반대하기는 어렵다고 본다. 문제는 주한미군이 차출될 경우 허술해질 수밖에 없는 한·미 연합전력의 대북 억지력에 대한 대비책이다. 특히 현 시기는 북한의 핵무기 개발로 한반도 긴장이 고조되고 있는 때다. 최악의 상황을 대비한 확실한 대책이 서 있어야 한다."

==== 북한 ====

보수 조선일보는 <美·中에 북핵 해결 시한 요구하자>라는 제하의 기사를 게재했다. "북한이 말하는 '2012년 강성대국 건설'의 시간표는 우리에게 북핵 해결의 마감시간이 되어야 한다. 한국이 절대로 핵을 가진 북한 아래 굴종의 생활을 영위할 수는 없다는 것이 분명하다면, 미국과 중국에 대해 '2012년까지 북핵 문제가 해결되지 않을 경우, 한국도 제3의 선택을 고려하지 않을 수 없을 것'이라며 시한을 요구하는 것은 어떨까. 물론 한국의 독자적 핵무기 개발 가능성을 포함하는 이야기로, 결코 쉽지는 않은 길이다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/26/2009102601871.html|[태평로] 美·中에 북핵 해결 시한 요구하자]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 27일, 35면)

김창기 논설위원

이명박 대통령은 24일 태국에서 "아직 북한의 의도가 불투명하며 핵을 포기하겠다는 결단을 내렸다는 징후도 보이지 않는다"고 말했다. 막후에서 논의했던 남북 정상회담이 일단 무산됐음을 시인하면서 배경을 설명하는 말로 들렸다.

정부는 남북 정상회담이 열린다면 북한 핵문제를 의제로 삼겠다고 밝혀왔다. 물론 '거론'이나 '촉구'만으론 부족하다. 김정일 국방위원장의 어떤 대답을 얻어낼지 사전에 계산이 서야 한다. 하지만 북한이 핵 포기 결단을 내린다 한들, 그것을 미국 대통령이 아닌 한국 대통령에게 먼저 약속하려 할지는 미지수다.

북한은 오래전부터 미국과의 '핵무기 상호감축 협상'을 요구하고 있다. 말이 안 되지만 그만큼 협상의 출발점을 높게 제시하고 있다. 북한은 미국과의 수교는 물론, 휴전협정을 대체할 평화조약 체결, 주한미군 철수 등 여러 조건을 내걸 것이다. 미국도 북한 인권 개선 등 다른 의제들을 협상 테이블에 올릴 것이고, 일본의 피랍자 문제도 남아 있다.

이명박 대통령이 말하는 '그랜드 바겐'(일괄타결) 원칙에 북한과 미국이 동의한다고 해도, 그 구체적 합의사항과 시간표를 만들기까지는 또 상당한 난관과 시간을 거쳐야 한다. 가령 미국은 "북한이 먼저 핵을 포기해야 수교할 수 있다"고 하지만, 북한은 핵 포기를 맨 마지막 순서로 미루려 할 것이 틀림없다.

북한이 지난 16년간 핵을 놓고 미국과 씨름하면서 터득한 게 몇 가지 있을 것이다. 우선 미국과 한국이 군사적 방안을 택하기란 사실상 불가능하다는 점이다. 아마도 1994년 봄 미국 클린턴 대통령이 준비했던 북한 핵시설 폭격(surgical strike) 방안은 전면전으로의 확전 위험성이 가장 낮은 상태에서 북한의 핵개발 의지를 꺾을 수 있는 처음이자 마지막 기회였을 것이다(공교롭게도 당시는 김일성 사망 직전이었다). 

북한은 또, 국제 압력이 견디기 어려울 정도로 강화되면 언제든지 대화 테이블에 복귀하는 것으로 그 압력을 풀 수 있다고 생각할 것이다. 다급해지면 '핵활동 동결과 사찰 재개' 같은 해묵은 합의를 재탕해 낼 수도 있다. 게다가 김정일 정권은 국제 제재로 인한 인민들의 고통에는 전혀 아랑곳하지 않으므로 오래 더 버틸 수 있다고 생각할 것이다. 오히려 남한과 미국 등 국제사회가 북한 주민들을 걱정하며 '인도주의적 지원'을 거론한다.

북한의 이런 생각을 미국과 중국 한국 등이 협력하여 깨지 못하는 한, 북핵 문제 해결은 불가능하다. 북한이 두 차례나 핵실험을 했지만 아직 실제 무기화(化)에까지는 이르지 못했을 것이란 희망적 분석도 없진 않다. 그러나 오류의 위험성이 있을뿐더러 사실이라 해도 무기화는 시간문제일 뿐이다.

북한이 말하는 '2012년 강성대국 건설'의 시간표는 우리에게 북핵 해결의 마감시간이 되어야 한다. 한국이 절대로 핵을 가진 북한 아래 굴종의 생활을 영위할 수는 없다는 것이 분명하다면, 미국과 중국에 대해 '2012년까지 북핵 문제가 해결되지 않을 경우, 한국도 제3의 선택을 고려하지 않을 수 없을 것'이라며 시한을 요구하는 것은 어떨까. 물론 한국의 독자적 핵무기 개발 가능성을 포함하는 이야기로, 결코 쉽지는 않은 길이다. 중국은 우리의 최대 교역국으로서 언제든지 경제에 치명타를 가할 수 있고, 미국은 우리의 방위동맹국일 뿐 아니라 원자력발전에 핵연료를 공급하고 있다. 우리가 꼼짝해볼 여지는 거의 없다.

그렇다고 언제까지나 미국과 중국을 바라보고만 있을 것인가. 군사적 방안을 포기했으면 제재와 협상을 전쟁하듯 비상한 각오로 추진해야 할 텐데, 미국은 결정적 수단이 없고, 한반도의 안정을 바라는 중국은 스스로 북한에 발목이 잡혀 있다. 한국이 새 돌파구를 연구하지 않으면 안 될 이유다. 

**[[http://news.donga.com/rel/3/all/20091027/23701083/2|[사설]아프간 파병, 국익과 국제공헌에 부합해야]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 27일, 35면)

유명환 외교통상부 장관이 어제 국회에서 아프가니스탄 재건사업에 투입되는 민간 전문요원을 보호하기 위해 경비 병력을 파견할 방침이라고 밝혔다. 유 장관은 민간인 파견규모를 130명 정도로 확대할 계획이라면서 “독자적으로 경비하는 문제를 논의하고 있다”고 말했다. 탈레반이 준동하는 아프간에 100여 명의 민간인을 보내려면 반드시 경비대책을 마련해야 한다. 정부가 최소한 수백 명 수준의 병력 파견을 검토 중이라는 얘기도 흘러나온다.

아프간 지원 확대는 한미동맹 차원에서도 필요하다. 로버트 게이츠 미 국방장관은 지난주 “한국이 아프간에 언제 어떤 수준으로 지원할 것인지는 전적으로 한국 정부의 결정에 달려 있다”면서도 “아프간은 경찰과 군대 육성, 재건사업 등 다양한 분야에서 지원이 필요하다”고 강조했다. 에둘러 한국의 지원을 요청한 것이다. 미국이 도움을 필요로 할 때 우리가 적극적으로 나서야 한미동맹도 강화될 수 있다. 동맹국의 어려운 처지를 외면하면 6월 한미정상이 합의한 ‘한미동맹을 위한 공동비전’도 공허해질 수 있다. 

버락 오바마 미국 정부는 출범 이후 아프간을 안정시키기 위해 전력을 다하고 있다. 아프간에 6만5000명의 미군이 있지만 3만4000명을 더 보낼 계획이다.

미국이 아프간 병력을 늘리면 불가피하게 해외주둔 미군이 영향을 받는다. 마이클 멀린 미 합참의장은 “앞으로 몇 년 안에 주한미군 병력의 일부를 이라크와 아프간으로 이동 배치하는 방안을 검토하고 있다”고 말했다. 주한미군이 아프간으로 차출돼 한반도에 안보 공백이 초래되는 일이 없도록 하기 위해서도 한국은 아프간 평화 정착을 적극적으로 도와야 한다. 우리는 베트남전쟁 당시 주한 미군의 감축을 막기 위해 베트남에 파병한 경험도 있다.

세계 10위권 경제력을 가진 한국이 아프간의 평화 정착을 위한 노력을 외면할 수는 없는 일이다. 아프간 국민은 8년째 전쟁 속에서 살고 있다. 6·25전쟁 때 유엔의 도움으로 북한의 침략을 저지한 우리에게 아프간 지원은 국제사회에 진 빚을 갚는 길이기도 하다. 

특히 미국이 원하는 경찰과 군대 육성 지원은 아프간의 조속한 안정을 위해 절대적으로 필요하다. …

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3844234|[사설] ‘주한미군 중동 차출’ 대비책 서둘러야]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 27일, 46면)

미국이 주한미군의 일부를 아프가니스탄 지역에 차출하는 문제를 검토 중인 것으로 밝혀져 관심을 끌고 있다. 지난주 한국을 방문한 마이클 멀린 미 합참의장은 주한미군 병사의 질문에 답하면서 “이 문제는 한국 측과 토의하는 이슈 중 하나”라고 밝혔다. 이에 따라 2만8500명 수준의 주한미군 중 지상병력 상당수가 차출됨으로써 우리의 안보 대비에 허점이 생길 것이라는 우려가 나오고 있다. 특히 2012년 4월로 예정된 전시작전통제권(전작권)의 한국군 이관과 겹치면서 한·미 연합군의 대북한 도발 억제력을 약화시키는 요인이 될 것으로 관측되고 있다. 마침 유명환 외교통상부 장관은 26일 국회에서 아프간 재건 지원을 위해 130명의 민간 전문요원을 파견할 계획이며 이를 경호하기 위한 경찰 또는 군 병력의 파견도 검토하고 있다고 밝혔다.

한·미는 2006년 1월 주한미군에 이른바 ‘전략적 유연성’을 부여키로 합의한 바 있다. 이는 주한미군의 역할을 한반도 방위군에서 미군의 해외 전진기지로 확대, 변경하는 것을 의미한다. 미국이 원하면 언제든지 주한미군을 차출해 다른 지역으로 보낼 수 있게 된 것이다.

한·미 간 약속에 따라 미국이 주한미군을 활용하는 것을 무작정 반대하기는 어렵다고 본다. 문제는 주한미군이 차출될 경우 허술해질 수밖에 없는 한·미 연합전력의 대북 억지력에 대한 대비책이다. 특히 현 시기는 북한의 핵무기 개발로 한반도 긴장이 고조되고 있는 때다. 최악의 상황을 대비한 확실한 대책이 서 있어야 한다.

최선의 방책은 가급적 주한미군이 차출되지 않는 상황이다. 미국과 긴밀한 대화가 필요한 대목이다. 유명환 장관이 아프간 추가 지원 내용을 공식으로 밝힌 배경도 그 때문이라고 분석된다. 동시에 주한미군 차출이 불가피해질 경우에도 대비해야 하며, 일시적 차출이 장기화됨으로써 사실상 주한미군이 감축되는 가능성에도 대비해야 할 것이다. 한국군 전력 강화를 서두르는 한편으로 주한미군의 지상 병력 감소를 보충할 해·공군력 추가 배치 등도 모색해야 한다. 아울러 전시작전통제권의 한국군 이관과 주한미군의 중동 지역 파견이 겹치지 않도록 전작권 이관 시기를 늦추는 방안도 적극 검토돼야 한다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://news.donga.com/Politics/3/00/20091027/23699346/1|한-미 엇박자? 이동배치 신호탄?]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 27일 8면)

윤상호 기자

美합참의장 ‘주한미군 해외배치 검토’ 발언 파장확산

앞으로 몇 년 안에 주한미군 병력의 일부를 이라크나 아프가니스탄으로 이동 배치하는 방안을 검토 중이라는 마이클 멀린 미국 합참의장(해군 대장)의 발언이 알려진 뒤 군 안팎에선 진의 파악에 부심하는 등 파장이 확산되고 있다.

국방부는 26일 멀린 의장의 발언에 대해 “주한미군의 해외 이동 배치와 관련해 미국과 어떤 협의도 이뤄지지 않았다”고 해명했다. 유명환 외교통상부 장관도 이날 국회 외교통상통일위원회에서 “주한미군의 역외 배치 문제는 이번 한미 연례안보협의회(SCM)를 포함해 구체적으로 논의되지 않았다”고 답변했다.

그러나 정부의 핵심 관계자는 “주한미군의 복무기간을 ‘가족 동반 3년’으로 장기화하는 작업을 마치면 앞으로 한국을 베이스로 삼아 중동지역 등에 파견 갔다가 복귀하는 식의 탄력적 병력 운용이 가능하다”며 한미 간 협의가 있었음을 시사했다. 다만 이 관계자는 “그런 식의 운용은 복무기간 정상화가 마무리되는 2015, 2016년 이후 얘기”라고 덧붙였다.

한미 군 당국은 당혹스러운 표정이다. 비록 한미 양국이 2006년 초 한국 정부의 동의 아래 주한미군을 다른 분쟁지역에 투입할 수 있도록 ‘전략적 유연성’에 합의했지만 주한미군의 차출은 ‘안보 공백’ 논란 등을 일으킬 민감한 사안이기 때문이다.

주한미군은 26일 “멀린 의장의 발언록을 다시 살펴보고 있으며 공식 입장을 발표할지를 조율하고 있다”고 밝혔다. 한국 국방부도 난감해하고 있다. 제41차 SCM에서 주한미군 병력을 현 수준(2만8500명)으로 유지하기로 합의하기 이틀 전 미 합참의장이 주한미군의 해외 차출 가능성을 언급한 것은 이해하기 힘들다는 반응이다. 한 당국자는 “멀린 의장의 정확한 발언 취지에 대해 미국 측의 설명이 없을 경우 의혹과 오해가 증폭될 것”이라고 말했다.

일각에선 이번 사태의 원인을 한미 간의 엇박자에서 기인한 것으로 보고 있다. 양측이 주한미군을 당분간 현 수준에서 유지하되 해외 이동 배치 문제는 전략적 유연성의 원칙 아래 비공개 합의한 뒤 이를 미군 장병들에게 설명하는 과정에서 공개됐을 것이라는 관측이다.

어쨌든 전문가들은 미국이 전 세계 미군에 적용되는 전략적 유연성 정책에 주한미군도 예외일 수 없음을 밝힌 만큼 머지않아 주한미군의 해외 이동배치가 이뤄질 것으로 보고 있다. 군 관계자는 “이동 배치될 주한미군 병력 규모는 500명 수준에서 이뤄질 것으로 보인다”고 말했다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1705.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001705 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 27, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
New Flu Swept Schools; 80 Percent of Recent Infections Occurred in 
Children 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
ROKG Considers Sending 300-strong Elite Unit, 
including Special Warfare Command Personnel, to Afghanistan 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, 
Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
New Flu Spreads Like Wildfire; Five Die in One Day 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
ROKG Considers Sending Police or Military Forces 
to Afghanistan 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
-------------------- 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan told the National Assembly yesterday 
that the ROKG is considering sending at least 130 civilian 
professionals to help rebuild Afghanistan and also some police or 
military forces to protect them. (All) 
 
An ROKG source, in a related development, said that a decision on 
whether to send police troops or soldiers will be made before 
President Barack Obama's Nov. 18 visit to Seoul and that sending a 
300-strong elite unit, including personnel from the Special Warfare 
Command, is a viable option. (JoongAng) 
 
The ROKG yesterday offered North Korea 10,000 tons of corn in 
humanitarian aid. This relatively small amount of aid, if accepted 
by the North, will be the first government-level food aid since the 
Lee Myung-bak Administration took office early last year. (All) 
 
Regarding the Oct. 22 remark by Adm. Michael Mullen, Chairman of the 
U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, that (the U.S.) is considering deploying 
part of USFK to Iraq or Afghanistan, the Defense Ministry said 
yesterday that the two countries have not discussed any troop 
redeployment. (Dong-a) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-Aid for Afghanistan 
--------------------- 
All ROK media covered Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan's remarks 
during yesterday's National Assembly session, in which he said that 
Seoul is considering sending at least 130 civilian professionals to 
help rebuild Afghanistan and also some police or military forces to 
protect them.  Foreign Minister Yu was widely quoted: "The ROKG 
plans to boost the medical, vocational and police training programs 
of the Provincial Reconstruction Team.  Currently, Korean civilians 
are under the protection of the U.S. military.  If the PRT is 
expanded, however, we'll need to protect our workers on our own." 
 
In a related development, right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo quoted an 
ROKG source as saying that a decision on whether to send police 
troops or soldiers will be made before President Barack Obama's Nov. 
18 visit to Seoul and that sending a 300-strong elite unit, 
including personnel from the Special Warfare Command, is a viable 
option.  Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun commented that even though 
Foreign Minister Yu said that no consideration will be given to 
combat troop deployment, this ROKG move can be seen as setting the 
stage for troop redeployment to the war-torn country. 
 
Possible Deployment of Some USFK Troops to Middle East 
 
SEOUL 00001705  002 OF 006 
 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo noted the Oct. 22 remark by Adm. Michael 
Mullen, Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff - that (the U.S.) 
is considering deploying part of USFK to Iraq or Afghanistan - and 
cited the ROK Defense Ministry as asserting yesterday that the two 
countries have not discussed any troop redeployment.  The newspaper 
wrote in the headline: "ROK Out of Sync with U.S.? Or Prelude to 
USFK's Relocation?" 
 
In an editorial, Dong-a also argued: "If the U.S. increases its 
troop presence in Afghanistan, it will inevitably affect U.S. troops 
stationed overseas.  ... In order to prevent USFK troops from being 
deployed to Afghanistan, creating a security vacuum on the Korean 
Peninsula, the ROK should actively help establish peace in 
Afghanistan.  During the Vietnam War, we sent our troops to Vietnam 
to avoid a USFK reduction. ...  In particular, providing assistance 
(by dispatching) police and military troops (to Afghanistan), as the 
U.S. would like us to do, is absolutely essential to achieve a 
prompt stabilization of the region." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "It would be difficult 
to blindly oppose (any plan by) the U.S. to send its troops in the 
ROK (to other areas of the world.)  What matters is that we should 
come up with appropriate measures in the event of a dispatch of some 
USFK troops, because the move will likely weaken the ROK and U.S. 
combined forces' deterrence against North Korea.  In particular, in 
a situation where tensions are mounting on the Korean Peninsula due 
to the North's nuclear development, we should thoroughly prepare 
ourselves against the worst-case scenario." 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo carried a commentary headed "Let's Demand 
the U.S. and China Set Deadline for Resolving North Korea's Nuclear 
Issue."  It argued: "The year 2012, by which North Korea aims to 
build a 'strong and prosperous country,' should be the deadline for 
resolving the North Korean nuclear issue.  If it is crystal clear 
that the ROK cannot live with a nuclear-armed North Korea, how about 
making it plain to the U.S. and China that unless the nuclear issue 
is resolved by 2012, the ROK cannot help but consider a third 
option, which includes developing nuclear weapons of its own?" 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
LET'S DEMAND THE U.S. AND CHINA SET A DEADLINE FOR RESOLVING NORTH 
KOREA'S NUCLEAR ISSUE 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 27, 2009, page 35) 
 
By Editorial Writer Kim Chang-ki 
 
President Lee Myung-bak on Saturday said, "There is no indication 
that North Korea has decided to abandon its nuclear weapons."  He 
was apparently explaining why behind-the-scenes talks about an 
inter-Korean summit came to naught. 
 
The (ROK) government maintains that the North Korean nuclear issue 
must be on the agenda of any inter-Korean summit.  But simply 
raising the issue alone is insufficient.  A strategy should be 
established in advance for the kind of response North Korean leader 
Kim Jong-il can be expected to give.  Even if the North decides to 
abandon its nuclear weapons, however, it is uncertain if the North 
will tell the ROK president before the U.S. President. 
 
Pyongyang has long demanded a reciprocal nuclear disarmament 
agreement with Washington.  Preposterous as this may seem, the North 
has set it as the starting point for negotiations.  It will call not 
only for normal relations with the U.S., but also for a peace treaty 
in place of the armistice agreement and the withdrawal of the U.S. 
Forces in Korea.  Washington, too, will place other issues on the 
table like improved human rights in the North. The issue of Japanese 
citizens kidnapped to the North also remains unresolved. 
 
Even if Pyongyang and Washington agree to (President) Lee's "grand 
 
SEOUL 00001705  003 OF 006 
 
 
bargain" of security guarantees and economic incentives in a 
one-shot deal to get the North to abandon its nuclear ambitions, 
considerable hurdles would still need to be overcome over a long 
period until specific accords are reached and a timetable is worked 
out.  For example, America would insist upon the North's 
dismantlement of nuclear weapons before a diplomatic normalization, 
but the North would undoubtedly want to leave denuclearization till 
the very last. 
 
In the 16-year-long nuclear tug-of-war with America, the North has 
learned a few things.  For starters, it realized that it is 
effectively impossible for the U.S. and the ROK to opt for a 
military solution.  Perhaps former President Bill Clinton's surgical 
strike formula, prepared in the spring of 1994, was the first and 
last opportunity to rid the North of its will to develop a nuclear 
program in a situation with the lowest risk of touching off a total 
war. 
 
Pyongyang also seems believe that it can always avert extreme 
international pressure by returning to the negotiation table.  In a 
desperate situation, it could again agree to old formulas like 
freezing nuclear activities and international inspections.  The 
regime, paying no attention whatsoever to the plight of its people 
due to international sanctions, thinks it can hold out for a long 
time.  Instead, it is the international community, including the ROK 
and the U.S. that is worried about humanitarian concerns. 
 
Until Washington, Beijing and Seoul discourage these calculations in 
unison, it will be impossible to resolve the North Korean nuclear 
issue.  Some pundits believe that the North, despite its two nuclear 
tests, has yet to turn its nuclear devices into usable weapons. 
Even if that is true, it is merely a matter of time until it does. 
 
 
The year 2012, by which North Korea aims to build a 'strong and 
prosperous country,' should be the deadline for resolving the North 
Korean nuclear issue.  If it is crystal clear that the ROK cannot 
live with a nuclear-armed North Korea, how about making it plain to 
the U.S. and China that unless the nuclear issue is resolved by 
2012, the ROK cannot help but consider a third option, which 
includes developing nuclear weapons of its own? China, its biggest 
trade partner, would be able to deal the economy a fatal blow at any 
time, and the ROK depends on the U.S. for fuel for nuclear power 
generation.  There is little room for maneuver. 
 
Should the ROK therefore leave matters to China and the U.S.?  The 
U.S., if it has given up on a military solution, should be pushing 
ahead with sanctions and negotiations but lacks the decisive means, 
while China, seeking stability on the Korean Peninsula, is hobbled 
by the North Korean regime.  Those are the reasons the ROK must look 
for new ways of breaking the stalemate. 
 
 
TROOP DEPLOYMENT TO AFGHANISTAN SHOULD BE IN ACCORD WITH NATIONAL 
INTEREST AND INTERNATIONAL CONTRIBUTION 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 27, 2009, page 35) 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan told the National Assembly yesterday 
that the ROKG is considering sending civilian professionals to help 
rebuild Afghanistan and some police or military forces to protect 
them.  Minister Yu said that the number of civilians to be deployed 
will be 130, adding that the ROKG is discussing ways to protect them 
on its own.  The ROKG must devise ways to guard them if it plans to 
send about a hundred civilians to Afghanistan where the Taliban 
reigns.  According to other sources, the ROKG is considering 
dispatching at least several hundred (police or military) officers. 
 
 
Expanding assistance to Afghanistan is needed to bolster the 
ROK-U.S. alliance.  Last week U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates 
said, "We obviously welcome any contribution that any countries 
around the world are prepared to make, but that decision - what and 
how much to contribute - is entirely up to the ROK."  This seems to 
be a roundabout way of requesting assistance from the ROK.  In order 
 
SEOUL 00001705  004 OF 006 
 
 
to shore up the ROK-U.S. alliance, we should take active steps when 
the U.S. needs help.  If we ignore an ally's difficulties, it may 
jeopardize the "Joint vision for the Alliance of the ROK and the 
U.S." that the two leaders agreed to in June. 
 
The Obama Administration has made an all-out effort to stabilize 
Afghanistan since taking office.  There are (currently) 65,000 U.S. 
troops in Afghanistan but the USG plans to send an additional 34,000 
troops. 
 
If the U.S. increases its troop presence in Afghanistan, it will 
inevitably affect U.S. troops stationed overseas.  Chairman of the 
U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Michael Mullen said that the 
Pentagon is discussing whether troops will be deployed from the ROK 
to Iraq and Afghanistan in coming years.  In order to prevent USFK 
troops from being deployed to Afghanistan, creating a security 
vacuum on the Korean Peninsula, the ROK should actively help 
establish peace in Afghanistan.  During the Vietnam War, we sent our 
troops to Vietnam to avoid a USFK reduction. 
 
As the world's tenth largest economy, the ROK cannot disregard 
efforts to build peace in Afghanistan.  The Afghan people have been 
living in a state of war for eight years.  For the ROK, which fought 
back against the North with the help of the UN during the Korean 
War, providing aid to Afghanistan is one of the ways to repay the 
debt it owes to the international community. 
 
In particular, providing assistance (by dispatching) police and 
military troops (to Afghanistan), as the U.S. would like us to do, 
is absolutely essential to achieve a prompt stabilization of the 
region. 
 
 
ROKG SHOULD HURRY TO PREPARE FOR POSSIBLE U.S. DEPLOYMENT OF USFK 
TROOPS TO MIDDLE EAST 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 27, 2009, page 46) 
 
In a noteworthy move, the U.S. is reportedly considering dispatching 
some United States Forces Korea (USFK) troops to Afghanistan.  In 
response to a question by a USFK soldier during a visit to the ROK 
last week, Adm. Michael Mullen, Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of 
Staff said that this is one of the issues the U.S. is discussing 
with the ROK.  This has sparked concerns that if some of the 28,500 
USFK ground forces are deployed to Afghanistan, it likely will 
undermine the security of the ROK.  In particular, observers say 
that this move may coincide with the transfer of wartime operational 
control to the ROK scheduled for April 2012, thus dealing a further 
blow to the U.S.-ROK joint forces' capability to deter North Korean 
provocations.  Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan told the National 
Assembly on October 26 that the ROK plans to deploy 130 civilian 
professionals to help rebuild Afghanistan and also some police or 
military forces to protect them. 
 
The ROK and the U.S. agreed in November 2006 to give "strategic 
flexibility" to USFK.  This means that the role of USFK is expanded 
to defend not only the Korean Peninsula but also overseas U.S. 
bases.  Therefore, the U.S. can deploy USFK troops to other areas 
anytime it wants. 
 
It would be difficult to blindly oppose (any plan by) the U.S. to 
send its troops stationed in the ROK (to other areas of the world.) 
What matters is that we should come up with appropriate measures in 
the event of a dispatch of some USFK troops, because the move likely 
will weaken the ROK and U.S. combined forces' deterrence against 
North Korea.  In particular, in a situation where tensions are 
mounting on the Korean Peninsula due to the North's nuclear 
development, we should thoroughly prepare ourselves against any 
worst-case scenario. 
 
The best-case scenario would be that USFK troops are not deployed to 
Afghanistan.  This scenario still may be realized through close 
discussions with the U.S.  Analysts believe that Minister Yu's 
official announcement to provide additional assistance to 
Afghanistan was made considering this ROK position.  Also, we should 
 
SEOUL 00001705  005 OF 006 
 
 
take measures against any inevitable deployment of USFK troops and 
prepare for a possible reduction in USFK that may result when the 
temporary deployment is prolonged.  The ROK should hurry to 
strengthen its own forces.  The ROK also should seek to deploy 
additional navy and air forces to replace USFK troops if they are 
dispatched to Afghanistan.  In addition, we should actively consider 
delaying the timetable for the transfer of wartime operational 
control to the ROK so that it does not happen at the same time as a 
dispatch of USFK troops to the Middle East. 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
ROK OUT OF SYNC WITH THE U.S.? OR PRELUDE TO USFK'S RELOCATION? 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 27, 2009, Page 8) 
 
By Reporter Yoon Sang-ho 
 
Controversy is mounting over the statement by the Chairman of the 
U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff that the U.S. is considering pulling some 
USFK troops out of the ROK. 
 
After the statement by Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff 
Adm. Michael Mullen that the U.S. is considering deploying part of 
USFK to Iraq or Afghanistan in coming years was made public, 
controversy over the true meaning of the remark is mounting inside 
and outside the military. 
 
Regarding Adm. Mullen's statement, the Ministry of National Defense 
explained on October 26, "The two countries have not discussed any 
troop redeployment."  Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Yu 
Myung-hwan also noted at the National Assembly's Foreign Affairs, 
Trade and Unification Committee on the same day, "The USFK's 
overseas redeployment was not specifically discussed (at any 
meetings), including the recent ROK-U.S. Security Consultative 
Meeting (SCM)." 
 
A key ROKG official implied, however, that there were discussions 
between the ROK and the U.S., saying, "Once the process of extending 
the tours of USFK servicemen to 'three-year family accompanied 
tours' is completed, it will be possible to manage USFK personnel in 
a flexible way, such as using the ROK as a stationing base from 
which USFK soldiers can be temporarily dispatched to the Middle East 
region." He added, however, "Such management will be possible only 
after 2015 or 2016, when the tour normalization policy is fully 
implemented." 
 
The ROK and U.S. military authorities appear perplexed.  Although 
both sides agreed in early 2006 to the USFK's strategic flexibility, 
under which USFK troops will be deployed to other troubled parts of 
the world with the ROKG's consent, the pullout of USFK troops is a 
sensitive issue, which could stir up controversy over a "security 
vacuum." 
 
The USFK said on October 26, "We are looking at Adm. Mullen's 
statement again and are determining whether to announce an official 
position."  The ROK defense ministry is also at a loss.  For the 
ministry, it is hard to understand why Adm. Mullen mentioned the 
possibility of pulling USFK troops out of the ROK, two days before 
the ROK and the U.S. agreed to maintain USFK presence at the current 
level (28,500 soldiers) during the 41st SCM.  An official said, "If 
the U.S. does not explain exactly why Adm. Mullen made the remark, 
it will increase suspicion and misunderstanding." 
 
Some observers believe that this controversy is attributed to the 
ROK being out of sync with the U.S.  They speculate that after both 
sides agreed at a closed-door meeting to maintain the USFK at the 
current level and to deal with its overseas deployment under the 
principle of strategic flexibility, this (plan to deploy troops off 
the peninsula) may have been revealed in the process of explaining 
(the flexible deployment plan) to U.S. servicemen. 
 
At any rate, experts expect that since the U.S. has now clarified 
 
SEOUL 00001705  006 OF 006 
 
 
that USFK is not exempt from the policy of strategic flexibility, 
which applies to all U.S. soldiers around the world, the USFK's 
redeployment to other part of the world will come sooner or later. 
A military official commented, "We expect that about 500 U.S. troops 
may be pulled out of the ROK." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>