^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1971 | 2009-12-18 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 18일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001971

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 18일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/10/06 04:08//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
'작전계획 5027(北 도발시 대응계획 담은 극비문서)'도 인터넷 해킹 당했다; 北 해커부대 소행 추정

중앙일보, 서울 신문, 모든 텔레비전
2011년 학기당 과목수 축소… 초등 10→7, 중·고 13→8개 

동아일보
소득보다 10억 이상 지출 4만명 탈세여부 가려낸다

한국일보, 한겨레 신문
'4대강 예산안' 대치 정국/몸싸움 여야/예결위 계수조정소위 구성놓고 충돌

세계일보
'쌍용차 회생' 강제인가/법원 강제인가 배경/파산땐 사회·경제적 후폭풍 감안

===== 국내 동향 =====

이 대통령과 시진핑(習近平) 국가부주석이 17일 북한의 비핵화를 위해 양국 간 긴밀한 협력을 강화하기로 의견을 모았다고 청와대 대변인은 전했다. (전체)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표는 지난 주 평양 방문에 관한 16일 미 국무부 브리핑에서 "특별히 평화체제 협상으로 움직이기 위해서 어떤 조건들이 필요한지를 논의했다"고 말했다. (조선)

추가로 인용된 보즈워스 대사의 발언: “4국만이 평화협정 체결을 위한 대화에 직접적으로 관련된다는 것은 명백하다. 이는 6자회담 참가국이 모두 이해하고 있는 내용이다.” 미국이 처음으로 평화협정 논의 참여하는 4개 국가를 구체적으로 시사했다. (동아)

이날 이언 켈리 국무부 대변인은 별도 브리핑에서 스티븐 보즈워스 대사가 오바마 대통령의 친서를 북한 정부에 전달했음을 확인해 주었다. "내가 확인해 줄 수 있는 건 오바마 대통령의 친서가 있었다는 것이다. 그러나 편지의 내용에 대해서는 얘기할 수 없다"는 이언 켈리의 발언이 널리 인용되었다.

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

=== 버시바우 대사의 방북 ===

모든 한국 언론은 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 16일 가진 지난주 평양 방문에 관한 미 국무부 브리핑을 보도했다. 대다수 보도는 북한이 그동안 줄기차게 요구한 한반도 평화 체계에 관한 보즈워스 대사의 발언에 초점이 맞추어졌다.

보수 조선일보는 "특별히 평화체제 협상으로 움직이기 위해서 어떤 조건들이 필요한지를 논의했다"는 보즈워스 대사의 발언에 주목하면서 "미·북 간 6자회담 재개시 즉각 평화체제를 논의하는 방향으로 '원론적인' 합의가 된 것으로 보인다"는 워싱턴 외교 소식통의 관측을 인용했다. 조선일보는 이러한 움직임은 비핵화 논의가 어느 정도 진전이 있고 나서나 평화 체제 논의가 이뤄질 수 있다는 오바마 정부의 기존 입장과는 차이가 있다고 보았다.

한편 보수 동아일보는 보즈워스 대사의 이 발언에 주목하였다: "“4국만이 평화협정 체결을 위한 대화에 직접적으로 관련된다는 것은 명백하다. 이는 6자회담 참가국이 모두 이해하고 있는 내용이다.” 동아는 미국이 처음으로 평화협정 논의 참여하는 4개 국가를 구체적으로 시사했다고 말했다.

대다수 언론은 이언 켈리 국무부 대변인의 16일 언론 발언에 주목하였다. 그의 발언 내용: "내가 확인해 줄 수 있는 건 오바마 대통령의 친서가 있었다는 것이다. 그러나 편지의 내용에 대해서는 얘기할 수 없다"

중도 우파 중앙일보는 이와 관련 18일 ‘김정일에게 전달된 오바마 친서 내용 못 밝히는 진짜 이유 있나’아는 제목의 기사에서 “미 국무부도 보즈워스도 구체적 내용 언급 꺼려. 북에 줄 수 있는 유인책 등 공개 힘든 제안 담겼을 수도”라고 썼다.

=== 북한산 무기 실린 항공기 태국에서 압류 ===

대다수 언론은 북한산 무기가 실려 있다는 태국이 압류한 화물기에 관한 후속 보도를 이어 갔다.

보수 조선일보는 북한 무기를 수송한 그루지야 화물기가 재급유(給油) 때문에 태국에 기착했다가 억류된 게 아니라, 태국 영공에 진입한 뒤 태국 전투기들에 의해 강제 착륙한 것이라는 러시아의 유력 일간지 코메르산트의 17일 보도를 되풀이했다.

압류 무기 상자를 검사하는 과정에서 영문 이용 지침이 발견되었는데 이는 이 무기의 출처가 북한이 아닐 수도 있다는 의미((http://www.nationmultimedia.com/politics/Seized-weapons-may-not-be-destroyed-Abhisit-30118692.html))라는 아피싯 웨차치 태국 총리의 16일 발언이 널리 인용되었다.

===== 특집 =====

**김정일에게 전달된 오바마 친서 내용 못 밝히는 진짜 이유 있나**(중앙일보, 12월 18일, 2면)

김정욱 특파원

이언 켈리 국무부 대변인은 16일(현지시간) 정례 브리핑에서 “보즈워스 방북 때 오바마 대통령의 친서가 있었으며 북한 정부에 전달됐다”고 밝혔다. 그러나 “편지 내용은 이야기할 수 없다”고 말했다. 보즈워스는 별도 기자회견에서 친서 전달 과정을 묻는 질문에 확답을 피했다. 대신 “북한의 비핵화 추진을 전제로, 현재 및 과거와는 상당히 다른 미·북 양자 관계의 미래 비전 등을 북한 지도부에 직접 전달했다”고 말했다. 그는 또 “동북아 국가들과 북한 간의 전반적 관계를 증진시킬 방법도 설명했다”고 덧붙였다. 보즈워스는 이어 “김 위원장의 답신을 가져오지 않은 것은 확인해 줄 수 있다”고 웃으며 말했다. 이런 말로 미뤄 오바마의 친서에는 미국이 북한에 줄 수 있는 다양한 유인책이 포함된 것으로 보인다.

보즈워스는 몇 가지 새 사실을 공개했다. 한반도 평화협정 체결과 관련, “6자회담이 재개되면 첫 번째 과제 중 하나는 비핵화, 평화협정, 에너지 및 경제 지원, 관계 정상화, 동북아 안보질서 구축 등 요소들의 순서 배열 문제가 될 것”이라며 “북한과 이 모든 사안에 대해 논의했으며, 특히 평화협정 협상에 들어가기 위한 조건들에 대해서도 논의했다”고 말했다.

그는 6자회담 재개를 위한 향후 활동과 관련, “6자회담 의장국인 중국이 앞으로 수주 동안 주도적으로 움직일 것”이라고 설명했다. 또 “북한이 우라늄 농축 프로그램의 첫 번째 실험 단계를 끝냈다고 공표해 6자회담이 열리면 이 문제도 의제에 포함시키기로 북한과 합의했다”고 말했다.

한편 미 국무부는 보즈워스의 방북 직전 친서 전달 계획을 한국 측에 알렸지만 내용에 대해서는 구체적인 설명을 안 했던 것으로 전해졌다. 특히 오바마 정부가 친서 전달 여부를 제대로 밝히지 않은 데다 내용에 대해서도 비공개 입장을 고수하고 있어 그 배경에 관심이 증폭되고 있다. 조지 w 부시 정부의 경우 2007년 12월 김 위원장에게 친서를 전달한 뒤 백악관 국가안보회의 대변인이 친서 내용 요약본을 공식 브리핑했다.

한반도 문제에 정통한 워싱턴dc의 외교 소식통은 언론에 공개하기 어려운 제안이 친서에 담겨 있을 가능성을 제기했다. 그는 “ 6자회담 복귀를 촉구하는 내용만 담겨 있다면 비밀로 할 이유가 없다”며 “오바마가 ‘김정일과 직접 만날 용의가 있다’는 취임 전 발언을 재차 언급했을 수 있다”고 말했다. 또 다른 소식통은 “보즈워스가 여러 차례 ‘북한과의 대화가 매우 사무적(businesslike)이었다’고 말한 바 있다”며 “이 뜻은 북한과의 대화가 레토릭이나 거대 담론이 아닌, 구체적인 문제를 놓고 진지하게 진행됐음을 의미한다”고 설명했다.

**“한반도 평화체제는 4者가 논의” 보즈워스, 구체 참가국 첫 시사**(동아일보, 2009년 12월 18일, 6면)

하태원 워싱턴 특파원

北에 ‘미국판 그랜드바겐’ 제안

“과거와 확연히 다른 비전 전달”

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 국무부 대북정책 특별대표(사진)는 16일 “(방북기간 중) 매우 직접적으로 북한의 지도부에 미래를 위한 비전을 전달했다”며 “그 내용은 과거는 물론 현재와도 확연히 다른 것”이라고 밝혔다. 보즈워스 대표는 이날 국무부에서 열린 브리핑에서 “북한이 비핵화라는 목표를 향해 나아갈 준비가 돼 있다면 북-미 양자관계는 물론 동북아시아에서의 전반적인 관계를 개선할 수 있는 구상”이라고 설명했다.

보즈워스 대표는 방북기간에 북한이 요구하고 있는 평화협정 체결과 관련해서도 논의가 있었음을 강조했다. 그는 “평화체제 구축은 6자회담에서 합의한 9·19 공동성명(2005년)에 포함된 내용”이라며 “북한이 이 문제가 중요한 요소라고 강조했을 때 ‘미국 역시 그렇다’고 말했다”고 설명했다.

하지만 그는 “문제는 비핵화, 평화체제, 평화협정, 에너지·경제 지원, 북-미관계 정상화, 동북아 안보질서 구축 등의 선후 관계(sequencing)”라며 “구체적으로는 평화협정 체결을 위한 협상으로 나가려는 조건에 대해 논의했다”고 말했다. 그는 또 “북한의 6자회담 복귀 이전에 평화협정을 위한 협상은 없을 것”이라고 잘라 말했다.

보즈워스 대표는 한반도 평화체제 논의의 장은 남북한과 미국, 중국이 참여하는 4자회담 형태가 될 것임을 강력히 시사했다. 그는 “4국만이 평화협정 체결을 위한 대화에 직접적으로 관련된다는 것은 명백하다”며 “이는 6자회담 참가국이 모두 이해하고 있는 내용”이라고 말했다. 9·19 공동성명에는 ‘직접 관련된 당사국들은 적절한 (6자회담과는 다른) 별도 포럼에서 한반도 평화체제에 관한 협상을 개최한다’고 했지만 구체적인 참가국은 명시하지 않았다.

한편 이언 켈리 국무부 대변인은 보즈워스 대표와 별도로 가진 브리핑에서 “오바마 대통령의 친서를 김정일 위원장에게 직접 전달하지는 않았고 북한 정부에 전달했다”며 친서 전달 사실을 공식 확인했다.

이날 보즈워스 대표와 켈리 대변인은 친서의 구체적인 내용은 함구했지만 전문가들은 북한에 비핵화라는 전략적 결단을 내릴 것을 촉구하는 한편 이 경우 상응조치로 평화협정 체결, 관계정상화, 경제지원에 나설 것이라는 내용을 담았을 것으로 보고 있다. 이명박 대통령이 제시한 ‘그랜드바겐’과 일맥상통하는 제안이라는 것. 찰스 프리처드 한미경제연구소(KEI) 소장은 “미국이 이른바 ‘대북 적대시 정책’을 추진하고 있지 않으며 북한체제 전복의 의도도 없고, 6자회담 재개를 통한 한반도의 안정적 비핵화를 원한다는 내용이 담겼을 것”이라고 말했다.

**보즈워스, 北과 평화체제 논의 합의한 듯**(조선일보, 12월 18일, 6면)

이하원 워싱턴 특파원

스티븐 보즈워스(Bosworth) 미 대북정책 특별대표가 방북 기간에 북한이 집중적으로 제기해온 평화체제 문제를 비중 있게 논의한 것으로 드러났다.

보즈워스 대표는 16일 미 국무부 브리핑에서 "특별히 평화체제 협상으로 움직이기 위해서 어떤 조건들이 필요한지를 논의했다"고 말했다.

보즈워스 대표는 "한반도 평화협정 문제는 9·19 공동성명에 포함돼 있다"며 (한국 전쟁은 공식적으로 종식되지 않았으며 단지 55년 전에 중단되었을 뿐이다.)

"6자회담이 재개되면 첫 번째 어려운 과제(challenge) 중의 하나는 비핵화, 새 평화체제·평화협정, 에너지·경제 지원, 관계 정상화, 동북아 안보 질서 구축 등을 어떻게 배열(sequencing)하느냐가 될 것"이라고 말했다.

평소 '신중하다'는 평을 듣는 보즈워스는 이날 이번 회담에 대해 "상당히 긍정적(quite positive)"이라는 표현을 사용했다.

그의 말을 종합해보면 이번 회담에서 미·북 간 6자회담 재개시 즉각 평화체제를 논의하는 방향으로 '원론적인' 합의가 된 것으로 보인다. 즉 "북한은 6자회담 재개를 받아들이고, 미국은 평화체제의 즉각 논의 시작을 약속했을 수 있다(워싱턴 외교 소식통)"는 것이다. 이는 비핵화가 우선 어느 정도 진행된 뒤 평화체제 문제를 다루겠다는 오바마 정부의 기존 입장이 변화한 것을 의미한다.

(이 기사는 조선일보가 준비한 번역이다. 우리는 웹사이트에 게재된 영어 버전과 한국어 버전을 비교해 두 기사가 동일하도록 일부 수정을 가했다.)

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1971.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 18, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
"Operational Plan 5027," a Top-S-e-c-r-e-t Contingency Plan against 
North Korean Attack, Leaked by Hackers; North Korea Suspected in 
This Attack 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
Schools to Have Fewer Subjects 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
National Tax Service Introduces Tax Dodger Detection System 
 
Hankook Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Budget Confrontation; Scuffles Again Erupt inside National Assembly 
after Opposition Lawmakers Occupy Budget Panel 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Troubled Ssangyong Motor Escapes Liquidation; Court Approves 
Ssangyong's Self-Rescue Plan, Saying Survival is Better Option 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to a Blue House spokesman, President Lee Myung-bak and 
visiting Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping agreed yesterday to step 
up joint efforts to denuclearize North Korea. (All) 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth, 
during a Dec. 16 press briefing in Washington on his trip to 
Pyongyang last week, said: "We talked specifically about what kind 
of conditions would be necessary to move into a peace treaty 
negotiation." (Chosun) 
 
Ambassador Bosworth was further quoted: "Obviously, only four of the 
countries (in the Six-Party Talks - the two Koreas, the U.S. and 
China) would be directly involved in a peace treaty negotiation, and 
that's well understood by all parties." This is the first time that 
the U.S. has mentioned the specific countries that would be involved 
in discussions on a peace treaty. (Dong-a) 
 
State Department Spokesman Ian Kelly, in a Dec. 16 regular briefing, 
confirmed that Ambassador Bosworth delivered a letter from President 
Obama to Pyongyang during his visit to North Korea. Spokesman Kelly 
was quoted as saying: "I can only confirm there was such a letter, 
but I cannot discuss the content or the tone." (JoongAng, Dong-a, 
Hankook, Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul) 
 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
---------- 
- Ambassador Bosworth's Visit 
 
All ROK media covered Special Representative for North Korea Policy 
Stephen Bosworth's Dec. 16 press briefing in Washington on his trip 
to Pyongyang last week.  Most coverage focused on Ambassador 
Bosworth's statements on a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula 
which has been demanded by North Korea. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo, in particular, noted Ambassador Bosworth's 
remark, "We talked specifically about what kind of conditions would 
be necessary to move into a peace treaty negotiation," and quoted a 
 
SEOUL 00001971  002 OF 005 
 
 
diplomatic source in Washington as speculating: "His statement 
suggests that the U.S. may have promised to immediately begin 
discussions on a peace treaty in return for the North's acquiescence 
to the resumption of the Six-Party Talks."  Chosun viewed this 
development as a departure from the Obama Administration's previous 
position that a peace regime can be discussed only after there is 
some progress in denuclearization talks. 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo, meanwhile, highlighted Ambassador 
Bosworth's statement: "Obviously, only four of the countries (in the 
Six-Party Talks - the two Koreas, the U.S. and China) would be 
directly involved in a peace treaty negotiation, and that's well 
understood by all parties."  Dong-a observed that this is the first 
time that the U.S. has mentioned the specific countries that would 
be involved in discussions on a peace treaty. 
 
Most media gave attention to Dec. 16 press remarks by State 
Department Spokesman Ian Kelly, in which he said: "I can only 
confirm there was such a letter (from President Obama intended for 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il), but I cannot discuss the content 
or the tone." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo's sub-head read: "U.S. State 
Department Also Unwilling to Disclose Details of the Letter; (The 
Letter) May Have Contained Various Incentives for North Korea, which 
U.S. May Find it Difficult to Disclose." 
 
 
- Plane Seized in Thailand with Weapons from N. Korea 
 
Most media continues to follow Thailand's seizure of a cargo plane 
allegedly carrying weapons from North Korea. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo replayed a Dec. 17 report by an influential 
Russian newspaper claiming that the seized cargo plane was not 
impounded in Thailand during a refueling stop, as previously 
believed, but was forced to land by fighter planes after it entered 
Thai airspace. 
 
Thai Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva was widely quoted as saying on 
Dec. 16 that English-language instructions were found in the process 
of checking the (seized) weapons boxes and that this meant the 
weapons could not have originated from North Korea. 
 
 
FEATURES 
---------- 
 
Why is U.S. Unwilling to Disclose Obama's Letter? 
(JoonAng Ilbo, December 18, Page 2) 
 
By Correspondent Kim Jeong-wook 
 
In a December 16 regular briefing, State Department Spokesman Ian 
Kelly confirmed that U.S. Special Representative for North Korea 
Policy delivered a letter from President Obama to Pyongyang during 
his visit to North Korea.  Spokesman Kelly said, "I can only confirm 
there was such a letter, but I cannot discuss the content or the 
tone."  During a (December 16) press conference, Ambassador Bosworth 
did not give a detailed answer to this issue.  He said that he 
conveyed "very directly to the North Korean leadership a vision for 
the future which would be a lot different than the present or the 
past, and ways in which we could improve both our bilateral 
relationship and improve North Korea's overall relationships within 
Northeast Asia."  Ambassador Bosworth said with laughter, "I can 
confirm I did not bring back a letter (from Kim.)"  These remarks 
indicate that the letter may have contained various incentives the 
U.S. can give to North Korea. 
 
Ambassador Bosworth revealed some new facts.  He said, "When we do 
come back to the Six-Party Talks, one of the first challenges is 
going to be to agree on an overall sequencing of the 
denuclearization, the move toward a new peace regime, a peace 
treaty, the provision of energy and economic assistance, 
 
SEOUL 00001971  003 OF 005 
 
 
normalization of relations, the establishment of some sort of a 
structure for Northeast Asian security."  He added, "We talked about 
all of these issues. We talked specifically about what kind of 
conditions would be necessary to move into a peace treaty 
negotiation, et cetera." 
 
Ambassador Bosworth said that China, as the chair of the Six-Party 
Talks, will be taking the initiative to coordinate efforts "over the 
next few weeks" for a new round of talks.  He also noted that North 
Korea agreed to discuss its uranium-based nuclear program in future 
Six-Party Talks, saying, "It clearly will be on the agenda when the 
talks resume. They put it there by making a public announcement that 
they had concluded the first experimental phase of the uranium 
enrichment program." 
 
Meanwhile, the U.S. Department of State reportedly informed the ROKG 
of its plan to deliver Obama's letter shortly before Bosworth's 
visit without, however, describing its content specifically.  In 
particular, attention is turning to why the Obama Administration did 
not officially disclose the existence of the letter at first and 
remains unwilling to disclose its details.  After the George W. Bush 
Government delivered his letter to Kim Jong-il in December 2007, 
U.S. National Security Council (NSC) spokesman held a briefing on 
the letter. 
 
A U.S. diplomatic source familiar with the Korean Peninsula issue 
suggested that Obama's letter may have contained proposals that the 
U.S. does not want to disclose to the media.  The source noted that 
if the letter just contains the U.S.' calls for the North's return 
to the Six-Party Talks, the U.S. wouldn't need to keep it 
s-e-c-r-e-t.  The source speculated that President Obama may have 
expressed his willingness to meet with Kim Jong-il.  Another source 
said that Ambassador Bosworth's remarks on his talks with Pyongyang 
as "businesslike" indicate that the talks were not mere rhetoric but 
serious discussions over specific issues. 
 
 
Bosworth: "Only Four Nations would be Involved in Peace Treaty 
Negotiation" 
(Dong-a Ilbo, December 18, 2009, Page 6) 
 
By Washington Correspondent Ha Tae-won 
 
Ambassador Bosworth delivered the "U.S.-style grand bargain" to 
North Korea. 
 
"I conveyed a vision for the future, which would be a lot different 
from the past." 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
said on December 16, "(During the visit to the North) I conveyed 
very directly to the North Korean leadership a vision for the 
future, which would be a lot different than the present or the 
past."  During a briefing held at the Department of State, 
Ambassador Bosworth explained that the vision "could improve both 
our bilateral relationship and improve North Korea's overall 
relationships within Northeast Asia, always provided that they are 
prepared to move toward the goal of denuclearization." 
 
He also emphasized that during his visit to Pyongyang, there was a 
discussion about the signing of a peace treaty, which the North has 
been asking for.  He noted, "A peace treaty on the Korean Peninsula 
is a commitment that all six parties accepted in the Joint Statement 
of September 2005.  So when they say that they view that as an 
important element, I can say with great sincerity so do we." 
 
He said, however, "When we do come back to the Six-Party Talks, one 
of the first challenges is going to be to agree on an overall 
sequencing of the denuclearization, the move toward a new peace 
regime, a peace treaty, the provision of energy and economic 
assistance, normalization of relations, (and) the establishment of 
some sort of a structure for Northeast Asian security," adding, "We 
talked specifically about what kind of conditions would be necessary 
to move into a peace treaty negotiation."  He also pointedly said, 
 
SEOUL 00001971  004 OF 005 
 
 
"We're not going to negotiate on any of these issues until we're 
back at the table in the Six-Party framework." 
 
Ambassador Bosworth strongly suggested that discussions about a 
peace regime on the Korean Peninsula will be carried out in a 
four-party format involving the two Koreas, the U.S., and China.  He 
said, "Obviously, only four of the countries would be directly 
involved in a peace treaty negotiation, and that's well understood 
by all parties."  The Joint Statement of September 19, 2005 says, 
"The directly related parties will negotiate a permanent peace 
regime on the Korean Peninsula at an appropriate forum (separately 
from the Six-Party Talks)" but it does not mention the specific 
nations to be involved. 
 
Meanwhile, in a separate briefing, Department Spokesman Ian Kelly 
officially confirmed that there was a personal letter from President 
Obama to Pyongyang, saying that Ambassador Bosworth handed the 
letter not directly to North Korean leader Kim Jon-il but to the 
North Korean government. 
 
On December 16, both Ambassador Bosworth and Spokesman Kelly were 
tight-lipped about the specific contents of the letter, but experts 
speculate that, in the letter, the U.S. may have urged the North to 
make a strategic decision to denuclearize, while promising to move 
toward the signing of a peace treaty, the normalization of 
relations, and economic assistance in return.  In other words, this 
is the same as President Lee Myung-bak's "grand bargain."  Charles 
Pritchard, President of the Korea Economic Institute (KEI), said, 
"In the letter, the U.S. probably said that it is not pursuing a 
hostile policy against North Korea, has no intention of toppling the 
North Korea regime, and wants a stable denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula through the resumption of the Six-Party Talks." 
 
 
Bosworth Talked About Peace Treaty with N. Korea 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 18, Page 6) 
 
By Correspondent Lee Ha-won 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
discussed prospects of a peace treaty with officials during his 
recent visit to Pyongyang. 
 
In a briefing at the State Department on Wednesday, Bosworth said, 
"We talked specifically about what kind of conditions would be 
necessary to move into a peace treaty negotiation." 
 
"The commitment to move toward a new arrangement, a peace treaty on 
the Korean Peninsula, is a commitment that all six parties accepted 
in the joint statement of September 2005," he recalled.  The Korean 
War never officially ended but was merely halted by an armistice 55 
years ago. 
 
"When we do come back to the Six-Party Talks, one of the first 
challenges is going to be to agree on an overall sequencing of the 
denuclearization, the move toward a new peace regime, a peace 
treaty, the provision of energy and economic assistance, 
normalization of relations, the establishment of some sort of a 
structure for Northeast Asian security," Bosworth said. 
 
He added he "found that the talks were quite positive." 
 
Given his remark, the U.S. may have agreed with North Korea in 
principle to discuss a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula shortly 
after the Six-Party Talks resume.   His statement suggests that the 
U.S. may have promised to immediately begin discussions on a peace 
treaty in return for the North's acquiescence to the resumption of 
the Six-Party Talks, a diplomatic source in Washington speculated. 
This development represents a departure from the Obama 
Administration's previous position that a peace regime can be 
discussed only after there is some progress in denuclearization 
talks. 
 
(This is a translation prepared by the newspaper.  We have compared 
 
SEOUL 00001971  005 OF 005 
 
 
the English version on the website with the Korean version and made 
some changes to make them identical.) 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>