^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1894 | 2009-12-02 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 2일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 03 SEOUL 001894

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84515|서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 2일]]
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/05/29 23:53//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
정부, 공공노조 전방위 압박;철도·공무원노조 압수수색 이어 간부검거·돈줄죄기 나서

중앙일보, 세계일보, 서울신문
"철도파업 불법" 규정

동아일보
북 화폐개혁 대혼란 상거래 사실상 중단

한국일보
오바마 아프간 새전략 발표/ 민주 진보파 벌써부터 등돌리고…

한겨레 신문
MB정부, 공공노조 탄압 ..노조.전국공무원 노조 사무실 압수수색 

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

버락 오바마 대통령은 3만~3만5천 명 규모의 미군 병력 아프가니스탄에 증파할 것을 주문하는 아프가니스탄 전략을 2일 발표할 예정이다.

그러나 벌써 오바마의 증파 결정을 '역사적인 실수'라고 확신하는 전문가들이 많다. (조선)

중국 국영 신화통신은 1일 평양발로 북한 외무성 관리가 이날 평양의 북한주재 외교 사절단에 구(舊)화폐 사용을 정지하고 11월30일부터 12월6일까지 구화폐를 신화폐로 교환한다고 통보했다고 전했다. (조선, 세계)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 오바마의 아프가니스탄 문제 연설 ====

모든 한국 언론은 국제면을 할애해 오바마 대통령의 예고된 아프가니스탄 연설에 관한 보도를 실었다.

보수 조선일보 이번 증파 결정은 취임 초 2만2000명 파병에 이어 두 번째라는 점을 언급하며 이렇게 말했다: "오바마 대통령은 영국 등 나토(NATO·북대서양조약기구)군에 5000~6000명의 파병을 요구하고 있다. …하지만 현재 9500명을 파병한 영국이 500명 증파를 자원한 것을 빼면, 어느 나라도 오바마의 요구에 선뜻 응할 분위기가 아니다. …벌써 오바마의 증파 결정을 '역사적인 실수'라고 확신하는 전문가들이 많다."

중도 우파 중앙일보의 사설 내용: <"베트남전 되풀이 말자" 더 많이, 더 빨리; 미군 3만명 증파…오바마의 아프간 '승부수'> 중도 한국일보 기사 제목 <오바마 "아프간서 2011년 7월부터 단계 철수"; 철군 앞당기기 위한 증파, 부정적 여론 무마용 '출구전략'>

좌파 성향 한겨레신문 사설: "오바마 대통령의 선택은 현실성도 없고 정당성도 부족하다. …미군의 무차별 군사작전은 탈레반 세력을 키우고 아프간 민중 전체를 적으로 돌려세웠다. 특히 미국은 부패한 현지 정권을 집중 지원해 저항세력과 맞서게 하는 정책을 추구함으로써 베트남전을 닮아간다는 비판을 받고 있다. 오죽하면 아프간 주둔 미군 사령관 출신의 칼 아이켄베리 대사가 병력 증파는 아프간인의 저항만 불러온다며 민간인 파견이 바람직하다고 공개적으로 밝혔겠는가. …정부는 늦기 전에 파병 방침을 재고하기 바란다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**<사설>美 아프간 증파 발표와 한국의 ‘재파병’ 논란**(문화일보, 12월 2일 39면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 1일 취임 후 첫 대(對)국민 연설을 통해 아프가니스탄 추가 파병 계획을 발표하면서 동시에 19개월 이내 철군을 시작하겠다고 밝혔다. 우리는 오바마 대통령이 대국민 연설의 무대로 육군사관학교 웨스트포인트를 선택한 점 또한 유의하며 2001년 9·11 테러 피습 직후 개시한 아프가니스탄 전쟁을 자신의 임기 내 일단락짓겠다는 의지를 그렇게 다잡은 것으로 이해한다.

오바마 대통령이 이렇듯 아프가니스탄에서의 ‘독전과 종전’에 자신의 정치력, 특히 2012년 선거 연임 여부까지 걸다시피 했지만 여당 민주당 내부는 물론 미국민의 전반적 여론도 전쟁 비용 등의 이유를 앞세운 반대론이 만만치않다고 한다. 하지만 세계 평화를 위한 미국의 대의와 국익을 위한 오바마 대통령의 새 아프가니스탄 전략에 대해 북대서양조약기구(NATO) 각국도 일정 병력의 증파 등을 통해 보조를 같이할 전망이다.

한국 정부도 25명 규모인 지역재건팀(PRT)을 120∼130명선으로 늘리면서 300∼400명의 경호병력을 파견할 것임을 국내외에 공언해왔으며, 연내 파병동의안을 국회에 제출할 예정이다. 그러나 민주당은 지난달 24일 ‘재파병 반대’를 당론으로 정해놓고 있어 난항이 예상된다. 민주당이 집권중이던 2007년 테러조직이 현지에서 활동하던 선교단 23명을 납치, 2명을 살해하자 당시 노무현 정부는 ‘테러단체와는 협상하지 않는다’는 국제사회의 금도를 어기고 철군하기까지 한 전례가 있다. 우리는 한국의 아프가니스탄 지원이 그 과오를 시정하고 국격을 만회하는 계기일 것으로 기대하며, 민주당 역시 보다 진취적인 입장으로 돌아서기 바란다.

한국은 지난달 25일 경제협력개발기구(OECD) 개발원조위원회(DAC)에 가입했고, 올해 수출 규모도 세계 9위를 마크할 전망이다. 내년 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의까지 채 1년이 남지 않았다. 우리는 한국의 국제위상 제고를 위해서도 대아프가니스탄 지원을 위한 질과 양 두 측면의 몫을 감당해야 한다고 믿는다.

**[사설]오바마의 그릇된 아프간 전략과 한국의 선택**(한겨레신문, 2009년 12월 2일, 31면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 대규모 병력을 증파하는 쪽으로 아프간 전략의 최종 방향을 잡았다. 그간 여러 대안을 놓고 숙고해온 그는 3만4000명 규모의 병력 증파를 핵심으로 하는 새 전략을 확정해 어제까지 관련국들에 통보했다. 군사 개입을 크게 늘려야 한다는 군부 중심 강경파와 민간 협력을 강화해야 한다는 현지 대사 중심의 온건파 사이에서 결국 강경파의 손을 들어준 것이다.

오바마 대통령의 선택은 현실성도 없고 정당성도 부족하다. 아프간은 역사적으로 영국과 옛소련 등 강대국의 침략을 여러 차례 받았으나 굴복한 적이 없다. 미국도 2001년 9·11테러 이후 알카에다와 탈레반 정권을 응징한다는 명분 아래 아프간을 공격해 8년 동안 전투를 벌이고 있지만, 알카에다는 소탕하지 못하고 국토 전체를 전쟁터로 만들었을 뿐이다. 미군의 무차별 군사작전은 탈레반 세력을 키우고 아프간 민중 전체를 적으로 돌려세웠다. 특히 미국은 부패한 현지 정권을 집중 지원해 저항세력과 맞서게 하는 정책을 추구함으로써 베트남전을 닮아간다는 비판을 받고 있다.

오죽하면 아프간 주둔 미군 사령관 출신의 칼 아이켄베리 대사가 병력 증파는 아프간인의 저항만 불러온다며 민간인 파견이 바람직하다고 공개적으로 밝혔겠는가.

미국의 우방들도 냉담한 반응을 보인다. 영국만 곧장 500명 증파 뜻을 밝혔을 뿐, 프랑스·오스트레일리아·독일 등은 병력 증파에 부정적인 태도를 나타냈다. 일본도 내년 1월로 끝나는 인도양의 자위대 급유 지원을 중지하고 금전적인 지원에 주력한다는 방침이다. 오바마 식의 전략으로는 아프간 문제를 풀 수 없다는 판단에서다. 그런데도 우리 정부는 지방재건팀(PRT) 요원 130명과 이들을 보호할 병력 등 400명 이상을 보내기로 하고 곧 국회에 동의안을 제출할 예정이다. 오스트레일리아나 스웨덴 정도를 빼면 아프간에 이해관계가 없는 나라 중 최대 규모다. 정부는 늦기 전에 파병 방침을 재고하기 바란다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1894.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SEOUL 001894 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 2, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
All-out ROKG Pressure on Public Sector Labor Unions; Police Raid 
Railway, Civil Servants Union Offices, 
Seek to Arrest Leaders 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
Rail Strike is Declared Illegal 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
N. Korea's Currency Reform Sparks Chaos; 
Business Transactions Practically Come to a Halt 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
U.S. to Send 34,000 More Troops to Afghanistan 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Lee Myung-bak Administration Cracking Down 
on Public Sector Labor Unions 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
President Barack Obama will announce his new Afghan strategy today 
which calls for sending 30,000 to 35,000 more U.S. troops to 
Afghanistan. (All) 
 
Many security experts, however, view President Obama's decision with 
skepticism or outright opposition, calling it a "historical 
mistake." (Chosun) 
 
According to China's state-run Xinhua News Agency, North Korea 
yesterday informed foreign diplomats in the capital Pyongyang that 
its old currency will no longer be used and that the old bills will 
be exchanged for new ones between Nov. 30 and Dec. 6. (Chosun, 
Segye) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-President Obama's speech on Afghanistan 
----------------------------------------- 
All ROK media led their international news section with a report on 
President Obama's upcoming speech on Afghanistan. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo noted that this is the second increase 
following the 21,000 additional troops President Obama dispatched 
earlier this year, and commented: "President Obama is also calling 
for 5,000 to 6,000 more troops from NATO countries other than 
Britain.  However, no country except Britain, which promised 500 new 
U.K. troops to the war zone, is willing to accept his request.  ... 
There are (also) many security experts who firmly believe that 
President Obama's Afghan war plan is a "historical mistake." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo wrote in the headline: "Obama to Send 
34,000 More Troops...Obama's Afghan 'Gambit;' 'Don't Repeat Vietnam 
in Afghanistan' More Troops, More Quickly."  Moderate Hankook Ilbo's 
headline read: "(Obama) Stresses Troop Increase for Withdrawal... 
'Exit Strategy' to Allay Negative Perceptions" 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun editorialized: "President Obama's 
choice is unrealistic and lacks justification. ... The 
indiscriminate U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan has bred 
Taliban forces and turned all Afghan people into an enemy.  In 
particular, by supporting a corrupt local government and playing it 
off against resisting forces, the U.S. is making the Afghan war into 
a second Vietnam War.  Isn't this why Karl Eikenberry, a retired 
U.S. Lieutenant-General and current U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan, 
 
SEOUL 00001894  002 OF 003 
 
 
publicly said that troop increases will only invite resistance from 
Afghans and that civilian workers should be dispatched instead? ... 
The ROKG should reconsider its plan to redeploy Korean troops to the 
war torn country." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
U.S. ANNOUNCES ADDITIONAL TROOP DEPLOYMENT AND ROK'S DECISION ON 
REDEPLOYMENT REMAINS CONTROVERSIAL 
(Munhwa Ilbo, December 2, Page 39) 
 
On December 2, U.S. President Obama delivered a speech to the U.S. 
public on his plan for Afghanistan for the first time since taking 
office.  In the speech, President Obama announced that the U.S. will 
send additional troops to Afghanistan, adding, "After 18 months, our 
troops will begin to come home."  It is noteworthy that President 
Obama chose to make his speech at the U.S. Military Academy at West 
Point.  He reaffirmed his commitment to putting an end to the Afghan 
war which was initiated shortly after the September 11 terror 
attacks. 
 
It seems that President Obama has staked his political career on the 
Afghan war.  In particular, he may want to be reelected in 2012 by 
bringing the Afghan war to a successful conclusion.  But the (U.S.) 
Democratic Party and a significant number of Americans are still 
staunchly opposed to additional troop deployment, citing the 
(tremendous) cost of the war.  However, North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) member countries are expected to fall in step 
with Obama's new Afghan strategy by pledging to increase their troop 
levels in Afghanistan.  In laying out his Afghan strategy, Obama 
said that the additional troop dispatch will benefit the national 
interest of the U.S. and promote the great cause of world peace. 
 
The ROKG has also publicly said at home and abroad that it will 
expand the Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) from its current 25 
members to 120 or 130 members and send 300 to 400 troops to protect 
the team; the Administration plans to submit the troop dispatch bill 
to the National Assembly this year.  The bill is likely to face 
strong opposition, however, because the opposition (ROK) Democratic 
Party officially decided on November 24 to oppose any redeployment 
of troops.  In 2007, when the Democratic government was in power, 23 
aid workers from an ROK church were abducted by a terrorist group in 
Afghanistan and two of them were killed, prompting the Roh Moo-hyun 
Administration to withdraw ROK troops from the nation in violation 
of the international agreement of "no negotiations with a terrorist 
group."  We expect that the ROK's assistance to Afghanistan this 
time will become an opportunity to correct such error and restore 
our national dignity.  We also hope that the Democratic Party will 
change its stance in a more forward-looking manner. 
 
On November 25, the ROK joined the Development Assistance Committee 
(DAC) of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) and, this year, the nation is expected to become the world's 
ninth largest exporter, according to the volume of exports   In less 
than a year we will host the G20 summit. We believe that, in order 
to raise its international standing, the ROK should also assume its 
share of the burden to provide aid to Afghanistan, in both its 
quality and quantity. 
 
 
OBAMA'S WRONG AFGHAN STRATEGY AND ROK'S CHOICE 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, December 2, 2009, Page 31) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama has decided that the final step in the 
U.S.'s Afghanistan strategy will be to greatly increase the number 
of troops in the country.  Having given serious thought to several 
options, Obama has decided on a new strategy that would reinforce 
troop strength in the country by (an additional) 34,000 troops, and 
informed relevant nations of this yesterday.  (In the debate) 
between the hard-line faction in the U.S, centered in the military, 
that called for an increase in military intervention, and the 
moderates, represented by the U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan, that 
 
SEOUL 00001894  003 OF 003 
 
 
called for boosting civilian cooperation (in lieu of sending in 
additional troops), the hard-liners won in the end. 
 
President Obama's choice is unrealistic and lacks justification. 
Historically, although Afghanistan has been invaded several times by 
major powers like Great Britain and the Soviet Union, it has never 
surrendered.  The U.S. likewise has been waging war for eight years 
after attacking the country to punish al-Qaida and the Taliban 
government following the terrorist attacks of Sept 11, 2001.  It has 
yet been able to mop up al-Qaida and instead has simply transformed 
the entire country into a war zone.  The indiscriminate U.S. 
military campaign in Afghanistan has bred Taliban forces and turned 
all Afghan people into an enemy.  In particular, by supporting a 
corrupt local government and playing it off against resisting 
forces, the U.S. is making the Afghan war into a second Vietnam War. 
 Isn't this why Karl Eikenberry, a retired U.S. Lieutenant-General 
and current U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan, publicly said that troop 
increases will only invite resistance from Afghans and that civilian 
workers should be dispatched instead? 
 
U.S. allies meanwhile are showing cool responses.  Only Great 
Britain said it would immediately send 500 more troops, while 
France, Australia and Germany have taken a negative attitude towards 
boosting troop strength.  Japan also said it plans to terminate its 
refueling mission in the Indian Ocean, which ends in January, and 
concentrate instead on giving financial aid.  This is because they 
believe that Obama's decision will not be able to resolve the 
problems in Afghanistan.  In spite of this, our government has 
decided to send 130 Provincial Reconstruction Team personnel and 400 
troops to protect them, and soon plans to submit a deployment 
approval bill to the National Assembly.  After Australia and Sweden, 
this would be the largest deployment of troops by a nation without 
direct interests in Afghanistan.  The ROKG should reconsider its 
plan to redeploy Korean troops to the war torn country. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>