^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1839 | 2009-11-23 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 23일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001839

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.ohmynews.com/NWS_Web/View/at_pg.aspx?CNTN_CD=A0001266830|서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 23일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/05/22 12:16//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
"국제중·외고(外高)도 세종시로" 정부, D외고 등에 제안

중앙일보
여야 행정구역 개편 합의

동아일보, 한겨레 신문, 서울신문
4대강 기공식/광주시장·전남지사 화끈한 ‘MB 칭송’

한국일보
한나라당 의원 147명 전화설문/ "세종시 수정 추진" 76명 "원안이나 +α로" 39명

세계일보
KDI, 사실상 출구전략 주문/"거시정책 기조 정상화 늦으면 부작용" 

===== 국내 동향 =====

베이징의 외교소식통은 22일 중국의 시진핑 부주석이 한국 정부의 초청으로 17~19일 2박3일 동안 한국을 방문한다고 전했다. 그는 차기 지도자로 유력한 인물이다. (전체)

<[[http://news.donga.com/Politics/3/00/20091123/24293265/|‘두 입의 북한’ 몸 달았나]]>: 북한 당국이 금강산과 개성관광 재개 등 김정일 국방위원장이 지시한 대남 사업을 성사시키기 위해 민간 라인을 통해 남북 당국 간 대화를 제의하는 한편 각종 매체를 동원해 남한 정부를 비난하는 ‘양면작전’을 벌이고 있다. (동아)

정부는 내달 8일로 예정된 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표의 방북 결과 등을 지켜본 뒤 북한의 제안에 대응할 듯 하다. (동아)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

로버트 킹 미국 대북인권특사 후보자에 대한 인준안이 20일(현지시간) 미 상원 본회의에서 만장일치로 통과했다. (조선, 서울)

잭 프리처드 한·미경제연구소(KEI) 소장과 스콧 스나이더 아시아재단 한·미정책연구센터 소장 등 한반도 전문가 3명이 21일 베이징을 통해 평양으로 출발했다고 베이징 외교 소식통들이 22일 밝혔다. 프리처드 소장 일행은 24일까지 3박4일 동안 평양에 머문다. (동아, 서울, 전체 텔레비전)

국무부의 한 고위 당국자는 20일 “우리가 (북미 간) 만남을 갖기로 합의한 것은 6자회담으로 돌아오겠다는 북한의 암시가 분명히 있었기 때문”이라고 말했다. (한국, 한겨레, 세계, 서울, 모든 텔레비전)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

대다수 한국 언론은 미 국무부 관계자가 19일(현지시간) 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 평양에 하루 반나절 가량 머물 것"이라며 성김을 비롯한 4~5명의 대표단을 데리고 갈 예정이라고 말했다고 21일 보도했다.

좌파 성향 한겨레신문은 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표를 단장으로 방북하는 미국 대표단의 규모나 체류 일정을 보면, 이번 방북에 쏠린 뜨거운 관심에 비해 다소 ‘조촐’하다고 평가했다. 해당 기사의 부재는 이렇다. "미 대표단 4~5명…예전의 절반 수준 될 듯 ‘실질적 협상 아닌 6자회담 재개 논의’ 의지"

한국 언론은 오늘과 주말에 걸쳐 힐러리 국무부 장관이 19일 다음과 같은 내용의 발언을 했다고 보도했다. "북한이 검증 가능하고 되돌릴 수 없는 비핵화 약속을 이행한다면 북한에 큰 혜택이 있다는 분명한 메시지를 전할 것이다. 북한이 수년 동안 계속 제기해온 관계정상화, 정전협정을 대체할 평화협정 체결, 경제 지원 등을 검토할 수 있다."

보수 조선일보 오늘자 사설: "북한이 핵을 포기하고 한반도 평화협정이 체결돼 영원히 전쟁 발발의 위험성이 제거될 수 있다면 그것을 바라지 않을 사람이 없다. 그러나 현실에서는 한반도 평화협정이 주한미군 철수까지를 포함할 경우 주한미군이라는 가장 확실한 전쟁억지력이 사라지는 대신, 언제든 휴지로 바뀔 수도 있는 평화협정이란 문서만 남게 되는 것이다. …북핵 협상이 진전돼 한반도 평화협정 체결 논의가 시작되더라도 무엇보다 앞서 대한민국이 평화협정의 당사자라는 사실부터 확실히 해야 한다."

중도 한국일보가 사설에서 주장한 내용: "문제는 북한이 어떻게 나올 것이냐인데, 흐름은 그리 나쁘지 않다. 최근 북한의 리근 미국국장은 방미 중 6자회담에 돌아오겠다는 암시를 분명히 했던 것으로 알려지고 있다. 중국이 다양한 경로를 통해 6자회담 복귀를 강력하게 압박하는 것도 긍정적 요소다."

국무부의 한 고위 당국자의 20일 발언이 널리 인용되었다. “우리가 (북미 간) 만남을 갖기로 합의한 것은 6자회담으로 돌아오겠다는 북한의 암시가 분명히 있었기 때문이다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[김진의 시시각각] 허전하게 다녀간 오바마**(중앙일보, 2009년 11월 23일, 34면; 발췌)

김진 논설위원

…오바마의 중국 3박4일은 소프트도 풍성했다. 오바마는 이복동생 은데산조를 만났다. 세상 사람들은 은데산조를 보면서 오바마의 아프리칸 혈통을 다시 확인할 수 있었다. 오바마의 제수(弟嫂)는 중국인이다. 백악관과 중국이 사돈이라니…. “인류는 앞으로 더 섞일 것”이라고 사람들은 느꼈을 것이다. 오바마는 만리장성에 올랐다. 돌아선 그의 어깨 너머로 장성이 펼쳐졌다. 이 사진만큼 G2 시대를 웅변하는 장면이 있을까. ‘달에서도 보인다’는 대물(大物)을 보면서 사람들은 중국의 기세를 절감했으리라. 상하이에서 오바마는 야심 찬 대학생들과 타운 홀 미팅도 가졌다. 중국의 미래와 대화한 것이다.

오바마의 한국 20시간은 하드로 보자면 어느 정도 성공이었다. 회담과 회견에서 두 정상은 한·미 동맹을 찬양했다. 김대중·노무현 정권에 비하면 ‘우정의 화려한 회복’이었다. 미국 대통령 특사의 방북이라는 큼지막한 뉴스도 나왔다.

그러나 오바마 방한은 소프트로 보자면 허전한 것이었다. 시간도 짧았지만 오바마의 동선(動線)은 무미건조했다. 오바마는 저녁에 비행기를 타고 들어와 잠을 푹 잤다. 이튿날 한국 대통령과 회담하고 점심을 같이 먹었다. 체류 20시간 동안, 그가 만난 보통 사람은 미대사관 직원과 주한미군이 전부였다. 그는 미군들을 만나고 서둘러 미국으로 돌아갔다. 이튿날엔 딸의 학교 연극이 있다고 했다. 그는 그렇게 다녀갔다.

물론 한국과 중국은 다르다. 중국은 G2지만 한국은 이제 막 G20에 들어갔다. 한국엔 은데산조도 만리장성도 없다. 그러나 그래도 특별한 곳이 한국이다. 60년 동맹이고 그런 한국을 오바마는 처음으로 방문하는 것이다. 게다가 어느 나라보다 한국에서 오바마는 인기 스타다. …한국인의 마음에 깔린 애정의 자락을 생각하면 오바마는 직접 한국인 앞에 섰어야 하지 않을까. 대학 강당도 좋고 고아원도 좋다. (“어머니가 두 번이나 이혼했는데 괜찮았나요”) “흑인의 어려움을 어떻게 이겨냈습니까” “명문대를 나와 돈을 많이 벌 수 있었는데 왜 시카고 빈민가로 갔나요”…. 한국 청소년의 질문에 오바마가 자신만의 언어로 답했다면 얼마나 감동적인 소통이었을까. 북한 문제도 그렇다. …비무장지대(DMZ)에 들어가서 “핵을 버리고 장벽을 부수면 우리가 도와주겠다”고 선언했다면 얼마나 웅변적이었을 것인가. 1993년 클린턴은 판문점 ‘돌아오지 않는 다리’에 갔다. 2002년 부시는 생중계되는 가운데 도라산 역에서 연설했다.

오바마의 소프트는 왜 그리 허전했던 것일까. 한국 외교력의 한계인가. 아니면 미국의 배려가 부족한 것일까. 부족하다면 혹시 아프간 철군이나 ‘소극적인 재(再)파병’ 같은 데에 미국이 불만이 있는 건 아닌가. 오바마에 비쳐진 한국인은 ‘오직 바라보는 마음’인가.

**[사설] 한·미FTA 혼선 … 윈-윈 방안 찾자**(중앙일보, 2009년 11월 21일; 38면)

“자동차에서 문제가 있다면 다시 이야기할 자세가 돼 있다.” 이명박 대통령의 한·미 자유무역협정(FTA)에 대한 언급을 놓고 혼선을 빚고 있다. 일부 외신은 “한국 정부가 기존 입장에서 180도 달라진 것 같다”고 보도했다. 민주당 등은 “누가 봐도 미국의 재협상 요구에 손을 들어준 것”이라 비난한다. 그러나 이 대통령의 발언은 추가 논의를 통한 부속서 수정 등 ‘사실상의 추가 협상’을 시사하는 쪽에 무게가 실렸다고 본다.

한·미 FTA 협정문은 1000쪽이 넘는 방대한 내용이다. 자동차 분야만 재협상하면 전체 이익의 균형이 깨질 수밖에 없다. 역사적으로 양국 정부가 합의한 FTA 협정문을 고친 사례도 찾기 어렵다. 재협상이 도마에 오르면 한국도 지적재산권·보건의료 분야에서 불만을 제기할 수 있다. 일괄타결 방식으로 어렵게 맞춰놓은 불안한 균형이 무너지면 한·미 FTA는 백지화되는 것이나 다름없다. 재협상은 바람직하지도, 가능하지도 않다.

미국의 자동차 분야에 대한 불만은 이해할 만한 대목이 없지 않다. 지난해 미국은 한국에 8864대의 자동차를 팔았지만 현대·기아자동차는 지난달에만 5만3000여 대를 미국에 팔았다. 물론 관세 등 제도상의 문제가 아니라 미국 자동차가 경쟁력을 잃어 우리 소비자들의 외면을 받고 있다는 것이 문제의 본질이다. 똑같은 조건에서 매년 5만 대의 자동차를 한국에 수출하는 유럽연합(EU)과 비교해 봐도 알 수 있다.

미국이 재검토 기준(benchmark)이나 구체적인 요구사항을 내놓은 적은 없다. 미국이 요구해온 고(高)배기량 차에 대한 세제 개편 등 대부분의 내용이 이미 FTA 협정문에 반영된 만큼 딱히 수정할 사안도 별로 없다. 그런데도 미국 자동차 노조와 일부 의원들은 한·미 FTA에 끊임없이 이의를 제기하고 있다. “한·미 FTA를 현재 상태로는 수용할 수 없다”는 발언만 반복되고 있다.

한미 FTA 협정문은 그대로

이 대통령이 “이야기를 들어볼 자세가 돼 있다”고 한 것은 한·미 FTA의 표류에 쐐기를 박으려는 의지의 표현으로 보인다. 다행히 오바마 미 대통령도 “돌아가면 의원들을 설득할 툴(도구)을 얻었다”고 화답했다. 한국은 조기 비준을 압박하는 효과를 얻었고 오바마 행정부는 반대 진영을 무마할 명분을 쌓은 것이다.

유명환 외교부 장관은 “재협상이나 추가 협상은 절대 없다”며 진화에 안간힘을 쓰고 있다. 하지만 방어적 차원에서 벗어나 양국이 보다 창의적이고 기술적인 방식으로 얽힌 실타래를 풀어나가야 할 때다. 지난해 촛불시위에서 경험했듯이 한·미 간의 협정은 폭발성이 강하다. 정교하고 치밀한 접근이 필요하다. 협정문은 그대로 둔 채 부속서를 일부 수정하거나 사이드 레터(side letter) 교환, 산업 간 자율협정 등을 통해 자동차 문제를 풀어가는 지혜를 찾아야 한다. 그 과정에서 양국의 국민정서를 자극할 독소 조항을 절대 삽입해선 안 된다는 것은 말할 나위도 없다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 대통령의 "미(美)와 자동차 다시 논의 가능" 발언 논란**(조선일보, 2009년 11월 23일, 39면)

이명박 대통령은 19일 오바마 미국 대통령과의 한·미 정상회담 직후 가진 공동 기자회견에서 "(한·미 FTA와 관련해) 자동차가 미국에서 문제가 되고 있다면 우리는 다시 이야기할 자세가 돼 있다"고 말했다. 미국 기자가 "한·미 FTA를 위해 한국 자동차 시장을 개방할 의향이 없느냐"고 묻자 이렇게 답변했다. 미국 측은 아마 대통령의 이 말을 한·미 FTA 협정상의 자동차 부문에 대해 재협상 또는 추가협상을 할 수도 있다는 뜻으로 들었을 것이다.

그러나 유명환 외교통상부 장관은 20일 국회에서 여야의 추궁이 이어지자 "재협상이나 추가협상 이야기가 아니다"라고 했고, 김종훈 통상교섭본부장도 "미국측 얘기를 들어보겠다는 취지"라고 해명했다. 한·미 FTA 협정문을 손댈 수 없다는 정부의 기존 입장에는 변화가 없다는 이야기다.

한·미 FTA는 2007년 3월 협상 타결 후 미국 정부의 소극적 태도와 미 의회의 반대라는 벽에 부딪혀 2년 9개월 가까이 잠을 자고 있다. 미국의 이런 무성의(無誠意)한 태도의 배경에는 한·미 자동차 무역 불균형에 대한 불만이 작용하고 있다. 작년에 한국은 미국에 자동차 59만8000여대, 금액으론 73억2000만달러어치를 수출한 반면, 미국은 한국에 8864대, 2억2000만달러어치를 팔았다. 문제의 핵심은 한국이 제도적으로 미국차를 차별해 이런 불균형이 생긴 게 아니라 한국 소비자들이 연비·디자인·성능·편의성 면에서 미국차가 유럽·일본차에 뒤진다고 보고 있기 때문에 빚어진 것이라는 사실이다. 미국이 윽박질러서 한국의 외국 자동차 수입 문호를 활짝 열었지만 그 혜택은 일본과 독일 자동차에 몽땅 돌아가 버린 것이다.

정부 관계자들은 대통령의 발언이, 미국이 한·미 FTA 비준을 계속 지연시키고 있는 상황을 돌파하기 위해 한 번 더 미국측 불만을 들어보고, 한국의 입장을 설명하는 과정을 거치겠다는 생각에서 나온 것이라고 설명했다. 그렇다 해도 불필요한 혼선과 논란을 가져온 것은 사실이다.

대통령의 이번 발언이 담고 있는 내용은 만에 하나 한·미 간에 FTA 관련 재협상이 논의된다고 하더라도 우리측의 마지막 카드로나 제시할 수 있는 것이다. 대외 협상의 마지막 카드로 준비하고 있는 복안이 즉흥적으로 공개되면 그 협상은 시작하기도 전에 지고 들어가게 된다. 우리는 전(前) 정권 5년 동안 대통령의 즉흥 발언이 국익(國益)을 위협하는 상황을 여러 차례 지켜봤다. 우리도 이제 그런 시행착오는 졸업할 때가 됐다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 힐러리 국무장관의 한반도 평화협정 검토 발언을 주시한다**(조선일보, 2009년 11월 23일 39면)

힐러리 클린턴 미 국무장관이 지난 19일 기자회견에서 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 방북과 관련해 "북한이 검증 가능하고 되돌릴 수 없는 비핵화 약속을 이행한다면 북한에 큰 혜택이 있다는 분명한 메시지를 전할 것"이라며 "북한이 수년 동안 계속 제기해온 관계정상화, 정전협정을 대체할 평화협정 체결, 경제 지원 등을 검토할 수 있다. 이 모든 것에 대한 논의가 열려 있다"고 말했다. 한·미·북·중·일·러 6자는 2005년 9·19 공동성명과 2007년 2·13 합의에서 '한반도의 항구적 평화체제에 관한 협상'을 별도로 하기로 합의했었다. 그러나 미국의 최고위급 당국자가 한반도 평화협정 문제를 이렇게 공개적으로 언급한 것은 드문 일이다.

북한은 그동안 북핵 포기의 전제조건으로 평화협정 체결을 주장해 왔다. 김정일은 최근 원자바오 중국 총리와 만난 자리에서도 미국이 대북 적대시 정책을 철회해야 핵 문제가 해결될 수 있다고 했다. 북한이 말하는 대북 적대시 정책 철회는 미·북 간 정전협정을 대체할 평화협정 체결, 그에 따른 한·미동맹 소멸 또는 소멸에 흡사한 변화와 주한미군 철수까지를 의미하는 것이다. 북한이 주한미군 철수를 진정으로 원하는지 여부와 관계없이 북한은 주한미군 철수 문제가 대한민국의 최대 약점이라고 보고 이를 노리고 들어올 가능성이 높다. 북한이 평화협정 체결에 그토록 목을 매오다시피 한 배경에는 정전협정 체결 당사자가 미국·북한·중국이므로 평화협정도 이 당사자 국가 간에 체결돼야 한다고 주장함으로써 한국을 한반도 문제 논의의 테이블에서 배제시켜 보려는 의도가 작용하고 있다.

북한이 핵을 포기하고 한반도 평화협정이 체결돼 영원히 전쟁 발발의 위험성이 제거될 수 있다면 그것을 바라지 않을 사람이 없다. 그러나 현실에서는 한반도 평화협정이 주한미군 철수까지를 포함할 경우 주한미군이라는 가장 확실한 전쟁억지력이 사라지는 대신, 언제든 휴지로 바뀔 수도 있는 평화협정이란 문서만 남게 되는 것이다.

한·미 당국자들은 이런 문제를 충분히 인식하고 있다. 그러나 북한이 "핵을 포기할 테니 미·북 간에 평화협정을 맺고 주한미군을 철수시키라"고 요구할 경우, 자국에 대한 핵 테러 위협을 제거하는 것이 국가 제일의 목표인 미국이 어떻게 대응할지는 속단키 어렵다. 그런 점에서 클린턴 국무장관의 입에서 '평화협정' 얘기가 나왔다는 것은 주의 깊게 살펴보지 않을 수 없는 문제다.

북핵 협상이 진전돼 한반도 평화협정 체결 논의가 시작되더라도 무엇보다 앞서 대한민국이 평화협정의 당사자라는 사실부터 확실히 해야 한다. 한반도 인구의 3분의 2를 차지하고, 압도적 경제력을 가진 대한민국을 빼놓고 평화협정을 얘기한다는 것은 어불성설이다. 다음으로 주한미군 문제는 유럽식 집단 안보체제와 같이 동북아시아에 확실한 안보 보장 장치가 강구된 다음에 논의해도 늦지 않다.

보즈워스 특별대표의 방북으로 당장 미·북이 평화협정까지 내달릴 가능성은 없다. 그러나 클린턴 국무장관의 발언으로 미국이 북핵과 평화협정을 동시에 테이블 위로 올려 얘기할 수 있다는 입장이란 사실은 분명해졌다. 대한민국은 이 대목을 놓쳐서는 안 된다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 기대 높아지는 북미 양자회담**(한국일보, 2009년 11월 23일, 31면)

내달 8일 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표의 방북을 통해 열리게 될 북미 양자회담의 전망이 밝아지고 있다. 북한이 미국측에 6자회담 복귀 암시를 했다는 얘기가 흘러나오고, 미국도 북미관계 정상화와 한반도평화협정 논의 용의를 표명하는 등 분위기가 고양되고 있는 것이다. 먹구름이 짙게 깔려 있던 한반도에 모처럼 한 줄기 희망의 빛이 보이는 것 같아 기대를 갖게 한다.

물론 미국은 보즈워스 일행을 5~6명 선으로 최소화하고 일정도 하루 반 정도로 제한하는 등 과도한 기대를 주지 않으려고 애쓰는 모습이 역력하다. 또 북측은 변덕스러운 행태로 자주 실망을 안겨준 상대여서 섣부른 낙관은 금물이다. 하지만 힐러리 클린턴 미 국무장관이 19일 기자회견에서 "북한이 검증 가능한 방식으로 비핵화를 추진하면 관계 정상화와 평화협정 체결, 경제지원 등을 검토할 수 있다"고 말한 것은 중요한 의미가 있다. 선 핵폐기 약속을 강력히 요구하던 자세에서 '비핵화를 추진하면'이라는 융통성 있는 표현으로 선회한 것이다.

클린턴 장관은 보즈워스 특별대표가 이런 메시지를 갖고 간다는 점을 분명히 했다. 지난 주 한국 등 아시아 주요국을 다녀가면서 오바마 대통령이 밝힌 메시지도 이와 다르지 않았다. 문제는 북한이 어떻게 나올 것이냐인데, 흐름은 그리 나쁘지 않다. 최근 북한의 리근 미국국장은 방미 중 6자회담에 돌아오겠다는 암시를 분명히 했던 것으로 알려지고 있다. 중국이 다양한 경로를 통해 6자회담 복귀를 강력하게 압박하는 것도 긍정적 요소다.

북측은 최근 금강산을 방문한 현대그룹 현정은 회장을 통해 우리 정부에 금강산 및 개성관광 재개를 위한 당국자 회담 개최를 제안했다고 한다. 이 역시 대남ㆍ대미 관계 개선에 대한 적극적 의지를 가늠케 한다.

북핵 문제 진전 없이는 금강산관광 재개 등 남북 교류협력의 정상화가 어렵다는 것을 잘 알 터이기 때문이다. 정부는 전반적인 상황 진전에 걸림돌이 되지 않도록 보다 적극적으로 북측 제안에 응하는 한편, 북미양자회담 이후에 철저히 대비해야 한다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 ======
<file rtf 09SEOUL1839.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 23, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
ROKG Seeks to Move International Middle Schools and Foreign Language 
High Schools to Sejong City 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Rival Parties Agree on Administrative District Reform 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, Hankyoreh Shinmun, Seoul Shinmun 
Contentious Four-River Restoration Project Starts; Local Government 
Heads Affiliated with Opposition Democratic Party (DP) Attend 
Groundbreaking Ceremony against DP's Policy 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Survey: 76 out of 147 Ruling Grand National Party (GNP) Lawmakers 
Polled Favor Revising Sejong City Plan, while 39 Lawmakers Favor 
Maintaining Original Plan or, 
if Necessary, Introducing "Plus Alpha" 
(additional measures to make Sejong city more self-sufficient) 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Korea Development Institute (KDI) Calls on ROKG to Implement an 
"Exit Strategy" to Head off Adverse Effects 
of Protracted Stimulus Policies 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to a diplomatic source in Beijing, Chinese Vice President 
Xi Jinping will visit the ROK from Dec. 17-19 at the ROKG's 
invitation. Xi is considered the most likely candidate for China's 
next top leadership. (All) 
 
 "Two-faced North Korea:" Pyongyang recently suggested that the two 
Koreas hold working-level talks to discuss resuming the suspended 
tours to Mt. Kumgang, while criticizing the ROKG through various 
media outlets. (Dong-a) 
 
The ROKG is likely to respond to the North Korean proposal following 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth's Dec. 8 visit to North Korea. (Dong-a) 
 
 
International News 
------------------ 
 
On Nov. 20, the U.S. Senate unanimously approved Robert King as 
Special Envoy for North Korean Human Rights. (Chosun, Seoul) 
 
Three U.S. experts on Korean Peninsula affairs, including Jack 
Pritchard, president of the Korea Economic Institute, and Scott 
Snyder, director of the Asia Foundation's Center for U.S.-Korea 
Policy, visited North Korea on Nov. 21. They will stay in Pyongyang 
until Nov. 24. (Dong-a, Seoul, All TVs) 
 
A senior State Department official said on Nov. 20 that the U.S. 
agreed to direct talks with North Korea due to a clear sign from 
Pyongyang that it plans to return to the Six-Party Talks. (Hankook, 
Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul, all TVs) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Most ROK media on Saturday (Nov. 21) carried reports quoting a State 
Department official as saying that Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth will stay in Pyongyang for one and a 
half days, leading a delegation of four or five interagency 
 
SEOUL 00001839  002 OF 006 
 
 
officials, including Special Envoy for the Six-Party Talks Sung 
Kim. 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun commented that the size and the 
length of Ambassador Bosworth's delegation are relatively "small and 
simple," despite the great attention attracted to the visit.  The 
article's sub-headline read, "This Four-or Five-Member Delegation is 
Almost Half the Level of Previous Visits to N. Korea; It May Show 
Washington's Determination that This Visit Is Not For Substantial 
Negotiations but for Discussing Resuming Six-Party Talks." 
 
Most ROK media today and over the weekend covered Nov. 19 press 
remarks by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in which she said: 
"We are going to go with a very clear message that there are 
significant benefits to North Korea if they recommit to the 
verifiable, irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
The U.S. would explore some of the issues which they have raised 
continually with us over the years: namely, normalization of 
relations, a peace treaty instead of an armistice, and economic 
development assistance." 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized today: "There will be no one 
who does not want (to see) North Korea to give up its nuclear 
ambitions and a peace treaty to be signed on the Korean Peninsula to 
permanently remove the dangers of war from the Peninsula.  However, 
should the envisioned peace treaty include the withdrawal of USFK, 
we may face a situation where the USFK, the most effective deterrent 
against war, vanishes in return for a peace treaty, which could be 
reduced to a mere scrap of paper at any time. ...  Even if 
discussions start on a peace treaty after progress is made in 
nuclear negotiations with North Korea, we must be assured that the 
ROK will be a key party to the peace treaty." 
 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo observed in an editorial: "The question is how 
North Korea will respond, but recent developments seem positive.  Ri 
Gun, Director General of American Affairs at North Korea's Foreign 
Ministry, has reportedly clearly hinted during his recent visit to 
the U.S. that the North will return to the Six-Party Talks. 
Furthermore, China is strongly pressing North Korea to rejoin the 
Six-Party Talks through various channels." 
 
A senior State Department official was widely quoted today as saying 
on Nov. 20 that the U.S. agreed to direct talks with North Korea due 
to a clear sign from Pyongyang that it plans to return to the 
Six-Party Talks. 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
OBAMA'S VISIT TO SEOUL LEAVES SOMETHING TO BE DESIRED 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 23, 2009, Page 34; Excerpts) 
 
By Editorial Writer Kim Jin 
 
President Obama's four-day three-night visit to China was full of 
events.  He met with his half-brother, Mark Ndesanjo, whose wife is 
Chinese.  Knowing that China and the White House are in-laws, people 
probably thought, "Human races will be more mixed."  President Obama 
climbed the Great Wall.  While looking at the huge structure that is 
reportedly seen even from the moon, people must have keenly felt the 
high spirit of the Chinese (people.).   In Shanghai, President Obama 
had a town hall meeting with ambitious college students.  He talked 
with a future China. 
 
President Obama's 20-hour stay in the ROK was successful to some 
degree.  During the meeting and the press conference, the two 
leaders praised the ROK-U.S. alliance.  It was a "splendid 
restoration of friendship" strained under the previous Kim Dae-jung 
and Roh Moo-hyun Administrations.  Big news of a U.S. Presidential 
envoy's visit to Pyongyang also came out. 
 
However, President Obama's visit left something to be desired.  His 
stay in the ROK was not only short but also prosaic.  President 
 
SEOUL 00001839  003 OF 006 
 
 
Obama arrived by plane at night and had a good sleep.  The next day, 
he met with the ROK President and had lunch together.  During his 
20-hour stay, all the ordinary people he met were the employees of 
the U.S. Embassy in Seoul and U.S. troops in the ROK.  After meeting 
U.S. troops, he hurried back home.  He said that his daughter's play 
was scheduled for the following day.  His visit to Seoul wrapped up 
like that. 
 
The ROK and China are, of course, different.  China is in the G2 
with the U.S., but the ROK just joined the ranks of the G20.  The 
ROK does not have either Ndesanjo or the Great Wall.  Still, the ROK 
is special.  The ROK is the U.S.'s 60-year ally, and President Obama 
made his first trip to the nation.  Furthermore, Obama is more 
popular in the ROK than in any other nation.  If President Obama had 
guessed Koreans' affection for him, he should have stood in front of 
Koreans, whether it was a university or an orphanage.  How 
impressive it would have been if he had responded in his own way to 
Korean teenagers' questions, such as "How did you overcome 
difficulties as an African American?" and "Why did you decide to go 
to  the slums in Chicago, even though you had a promising future 
after graduating from a prestigious university?"  The same goes for 
the North Korean issue.  If he had entered the demilitarized zone 
(DMZ) and declared, "If North Korea abandons its nuclear programs 
and tears down the walls, we will help you," how eloquent it would 
have been.  In 1993, then-President Clinton visited the "Bridge of 
No Return" at the truce village of Panmunjom.  In 2002, 
then-President Bush gave a speech at Dorasan Station, which was 
broadcast live. 
 
Why did President Obama's visit leave much to be desired?  Was it 
attributable to lack of diplomatic skills on the part of the ROK or 
due to Washington's lack of consideration for the ROK?  If the 
latter is true, is the U.S. displeased about the ROK's troop 
withdrawal from Afghanistan or its "passive" troop redeployment?  Is 
the affection that Koreans feel for Obama one-sided love? 
 
 
NO RENEGOTIATION OF THE FTA 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 21, 2009, Page 38) 
 
President Lee Myung-bak said he'd be willing to talk about 
automobiles in the Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement if there are any 
problems there.  That's not surprising.  But Lee's words left room 
for some misunderstanding and some foreign news agencies reported 
that Korea had taken a 180-degree turn on its previous stance.  The 
Democratic Party and other opposition sectors criticized the 
government for giving in to the U.S. request for renegotiations. 
But Lee more than likely referred to additional negotiations, which 
would entail revising supplementary documents through extra 
discussions. 
 
The (text of the) Korea-U.S. FTA runs over a thousand pages. 
Renegotiating only the automobiles part (of the agreement) would 
break the balance of benefits for both sides.  And it's difficult to 
find any precedent where countries fixed their already-agreed-upon 
FTA pacts.  And once the renegotiation is under way, Korea could 
raise complaints on intellectual property rights and medicine.  When 
the balance that was achieved through a packaged settlement is 
endangered, then the Korea-U.S. FTA will be all but wiped out. 
Renegotiation is not right, nor is it possible. 
 
The U.S. discontent with the automobiles section is understandable. 
Last year, the United States sold 8,864 vehicles in Korea, but 
Korea's Hyundai-Kia Motors sold about 53,000 cars in the U.S.  in 
October alone.  Of course, it's not all because of systematic 
problems, such as tariffs.  The essence of the problem is that the 
U.S. cars are no longer competitive.  It's easy to see that when you 
consider that the European Union exports 50,000 cars a year to Korea 
under the same conditions.  The United States has never presented 
any benchmark for review of the FTA or made any specific requests. 
Revision to the taxation on cars with large engine displacements and 
other U.S. demands are already included in the current agreement. 
But U.S. auto unions and some members of Congress are constantly 
raising issue with the deal.  They keep saying they won't accept the 
 
SEOUL 00001839  004 OF 006 
 
 
Korea-U.S. FTA in its current form. 
 
When Lee said he was ready to listen, he may have tried to quell any 
doubts surrounding the agreement.  Fortunately, U.S. President 
Barack Obama responded that he'd acquired a tool to persuade 
Congress once he returns home. 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan was busy fending off speculation 
about renegotiation, saying it would never take place.  But it's 
time the two countries got past defensive postures and tried to 
solve problems creatively and diplomatically.  As we witnessed 
during the candlelight vigils last year, any Korea-U.S. deal can be 
incendiary.  It'd be wise to leave the agreement itself untouched 
and then revise annexed documents, exchange side letters or reach 
pacts between industries in order to resolve the automobile issue. 
And both sides must never insert any toxic clause that could provoke 
the people of their own countries. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
LEE'S FTA COMMENTS CREATE NEEDLESS CONFUSION 
(Chosun Ilbo, November 23, 2009, Page 39) 
 
In a press conference on Thursday with U.S. President Barack Obama, 
President Lee Myung-bak said, "If there are any problems in the 
automobile sector... then we are ready to resolve this issue."  The 
comment came in response to a question by an American journalist who 
asked if Lee was willing to open up Korea's automotive market 
further to expedite ratification of the bilateral free trade 
agreement.  The U.S. side probably interpreted Lee's comments as 
signaling his willingness to either re-negotiate the FTA or hold 
additional talks. 
 
But faced with questions from lawmakers on Friday, Foreign Minister 
Yu Myung-hwan said the President's comments did not signify a 
re-negotiation or additional talks, while Trade Minister Kim 
Jong-hoon said they meant that Korea would "listen to what the U.S. 
has to say."  In other words, there is no change in the government's 
stance that the FTA stands as signed by both sides in 2007. 
 
Two-and-a-half years later, the FTA has yet to be ratified by either 
side, due to opposition by the U.S. Senate.  U.S. discontent over 
the trade imbalance with Korea in the automotive sector played a 
major role in Washington's lack of action.  Last year, Korea 
exported around 598,000 cars to the U.S. worth US$7.32 billion.  But 
imports of American-made cars to Korea totaled just 8,864 vehicles 
worth $220 million.  At the crux of the matter is the fact that this 
imbalance is not the result of a systematic discrimination against 
American cars by the Korean government, but that Korean consumers 
find American cars inferior to European and Japanese ones in terms 
of fuel efficiency, design, performance and comfort.  U.S. pressure 
forced Korea's automotive market wide open, but the benefits of 
increased access have gone to the Japanese and Germans instead. 
 
A government official explained that Lee's comments expressed his 
willingness to listen to U.S. complaints and explain Korea's 
position, in order to end the continued delays.  But the bottom line 
is that the comments have generated unnecessary confusion. 
 
Such comments can be thrown out as the last card if all else fails, 
but such impromptu comments sap the (government's) negotiating 
power.  Korea's national interests suffered in the five years of the 
previous administration from impromptu comments by the former 
President.  It is time we went beyond such mistakes.  The 
President's aides have made a big mistake in allowing this blunder 
to happen. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
IS THE U.S. MOVING TOWARD A PEACE TREATY WITH N. KOREA? 
 
SEOUL 00001839  005 OF 006 
 
 
(Chosun Ilbo, November 23, 2009, Page 39 
 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told reporters at a press 
conference on Thursday, "We are going to go with a very clear 
message that there are significant benefits to North Korea if they 
recommit to the verifiable, irreversible denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula."  She added that the U.S. "would explore some of 
the issues which they have raised continually with us over the 
years; namely, normalization of relations, a peace treaty instead of 
an armistice, (and) economic development assistance." "All of that 
would be open for discussion," she said.  In the September 19 Joint 
Statement of 2005 and the February 13 Agreement of 2007, the two 
Koreas, the U.S., China, Japan and Russia agreed to hold separate 
talks over a permanent peace treaty on the Korean Peninsula, but 
this is the first time for a top U.S. diplomat to mention the peace 
treaty publicly. 
 
Until now, North Korea has been demanding a peace treaty as a 
precondition to giving up its nuclear weapons program.  In a recent 
meeting with Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, North Korean leader Kim 
Jong-il said the nuclear standoff could end only if the U.S. 
government abandons its "hostile" policy toward the North.  By that 
he means the signing of a peace treaty that will replace the 
armistice, the dissolution of the South Korea-U.S. alliance or 
similar measures and the departure of American troops on the 
peninsula.  Regardless of whether North Korea really wants U.S. 
troops to leave, it could view the evacuation of American forces as 
the greatest threat to South Korea and seek to use that weakness to 
its benefit.  The reason North Korea has been so adamant about a 
peace treaty is because the signatories of the armistice were China 
and the U.S.  and the participation of those two superpowers in 
signing a peace treaty would play into Pyongyang's strategy of 
excluding South Korea from the negotiating table. 
 
There will be no one who does not want (to see) North Korea to give 
up its nuclear ambitions and a peace treaty to be signed on the 
Korean Peninsula to permanently remove the dangers of war from the 
Peninsula.  However, should the envisioned peace treaty include the 
withdrawal of USFK, we may face a situation where the USFK, the most 
effective deterrent against war, vanishes in return for a peace 
treaty, which could be reduced to a mere scrap of paper at any time. 
 South Korean and U.S. officials are fully aware of this. But if 
North Korea demands a peace treaty and the departure of U.S. troops 
in exchange for abandoning its nuclear program, it is difficult to 
gauge Washington's response, whose first priority is to get rid of 
nuclear threats against the U.S. From that standpoint, Clinton's 
"peace treaty" comment deserves a closer look. 
 
Even if discussions start on a peace treaty after progress is made 
in nuclear negotiations with North Korea, we must be assured that 
the ROK will be a key party to the peace treaty. The ROK accounts 
for two-thirds of the population of the Korean Peninsula, and it 
makes no sense to discuss any treaty of that kind which would 
exclude the main economic force in the region. The issue of U.S. 
troop presence can be discussed later after a watertight security 
framework is created in Northeast Asia, similar to the common 
security system shared by European countries. 
 
There is no chance that Washington and Pyongyang will sign a peace 
treaty any time soon. But Clinton's comments have made it clear that 
the U.S. could simultaneously discuss the North Korean nuclear 
problem and a peace treaty with the North.  South Korea should not 
miss this critical point. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
GROWING EXPECTATIONS FOR U.S.-N. KOREAN BILATERAL TALKS 
(Hankook Ilbo, November 23, page 31) 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen 
Bosworth's December 8 visit to North Korea creates a bright prospect 
for U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks.  The North has reportedly 
 
SEOUL 00001839  006 OF 006 
 
 
hinted at the possibility of returning to the Six-Party Talks.  The 
U.S. has expressed willingness to discuss normalization of relations 
with North Korea and a Korean peninsula peace treaty.  These 
indicate a favorable atmosphere (for U.S.-North Korea relations.)  A 
ray of hope is shining on the Korean Peninsula where a dark cloud 
has hung. 
 
It seems that the U.S. does not want to stir up too many 
expectations from the North because the number of Ambassador 
Bosworth's delegation will not exceed 5-6 and he will stay in 
Pyongyang just for one and a half days.  In addition, it is too 
early to be optimistic since North Korea has often disappointingly 
made capricious moves.  However, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary 
Clinton made significant remarks during a November 19 press 
conference that if North Korea seeks denuclearization in a 
verifiable way, the U.S. may consider normalization of diplomatic 
relations with the North, a peace treaty and economic assistance." 
She used a flexible expression, "if North Korea seeks 
denuclearization", instead of strongly demanding that the North 
should be committed to nuclear dismantlement first. 
 
Secretary Clinton made it clear that Ambassador Bosworth will visit 
North Korea with this message.  During his trip to Asia, including 
the ROK, President Obama delivered similar messages.  The question 
is how North Korea will respond, but recent developments seem 
positive.  Ri Gun, Director General of American Affairs at North 
Korea's Foreign Ministry, has reportedly clearly hinted during his 
recent visit to the U.S. that the North will return to the Six-Party 
Talks.  Furthermore, China is strongly pressing North Korea to 
rejoin the Six-Party Talks through various channels. 
 
When Hyundai Chairwoman Hyun Jeong-eun recently visited Mt. Kumgang, 
North Korea suggested to the ROK that both countries hold a meeting 
to resume tours to Mt. Kumgang and Kaesong.  This shows that North 
Korea is very willing to improve relations with the ROK and the U.S. 
 The North may be well aware that it would be hard to normalize 
inter-Korean cooperation such as the resumption of Mt. Kumgang tour 
project without making progress on the North Korean nuclear issue. 
The ROKG should actively respond to the North's offer in order not 
to hamper overall progress while thoroughly preparing for the 
outcome of U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>