^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL228  |  2009-02-12 09:56  |  기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV ECON OVIP KS }}  |
====== 제 목: 국무부 장관의 한국 방문을 위한 무대연출 ======
기 밀SEOUL 000228 
스티븐스 대사가 국무부 장관에게 

행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 02/12/2019 
태그: PREL(([External Political Relations])), PGOV(([Internal Governmental Affairs])), ECON(([Economic Conditions])), OVIP(([Visits and Travel of Prominent Individuals and Leaders])), KS(([Korea (South)]))
제 목: 국무부 장관의 한국 방문을 위한 무대연출
분류자: 캐슬린 스티븐스 대사 근거 1.4 (b/d) 
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2012/01/07 19:10//
===== 환영인사 =====
1. (기밀) 국무부 장관님 한국 방문을 환영합니다. 당신께서 취임 이후 첫 순방국 중의 하나로 서울을 택한 일은 모든 남한 국민들에게 좋은 반향을 일으키고 있으며, 미국이 한미 동맹과 아시아 외교를 중시한다는 신호를 당신과 대통령께서 보내는 것입니다. 당신은 남한 국민의 따뜻한 환영을 받을 것입니다. 이명박 대통령과 유명환 외교통상부 장관은 당신을 몹시 보고 싶어하며, 새로운 미국 정부와 함께 힘찬 출발을 하고 싶어합니다.

2. (기밀) 한국정부는 살아 숨 쉬는 민주주의, 자유시장, 첨단기술 경제, 고학력 인구, 자유언론, 그리고 미합중국과의 갈수록 깊어지는 양국 민간인 사이 유대감 등은 성공담 중에서도 단연 압권이며, 단지 미국 외교정책에 국한된 것이 아닙니다. 1948년에 성립된 이후 한국과의 강도 높은 관계는 당신께서 최근 미국외교정책을 설명하면서 표방한 국방, 외교, 개발이라는 세 개의 중요한 주춧돌의 전형적인 모습입니다. 지금도 28,000 인원의 미군 부대가 한반도에 주둔하고 있고, 한국전 이후에 미국이 제공한 상당한 개발원조, 북한 비핵화 노력, 동북아시아의 안전과 번영의 미래를 달성하기 위한 외교적 협조 등에서 나타나듯이 남한의 성공은 국방에 대한 한미 공통의 헌신에 기초하고 있습니다.

3. (기밀) 현재 남한은 검증을 거친 민주주의 제도를 갖춘 하나의 선진국으로 확대된 역내 및 글로벌 역할을 맡기 위한 정치적인 의지뿐만 아닌 역량도 커지고 있습니다. 당신의 방문으로 인권의 전파에서 기후변화, 해적, 대테러 작전 이슈까지 우리와 더불어 한층 적극적인 동반자가 되도록 한국민을 독려할 것입니다. 미국은 이러한 역량이 상당한 동맹국과 가치관과 전략적 목표를 공유하고 있습니다; 한미 관계를 격상시키려는 양국 공통의 열망을 실체화하려면 한국을 미국 동맹국 중에서 첫 번째 반열에 올려놓을 필요가 있습니다.
===== 한국정부 국내상황 =====
4. (기밀) 남한은 지난해 내내 국내 정치에 엄청난 변화가 있었는데, 보수 한나라당이 정부의 행정부와 입법부를 확보했습니다. 정권 인수 기간은 평탄치 않았습니다. 이명박 대통령의 새 보수 정부에 대한 저항은 거의 즉각적으로 나타나면서, 미국산 쇠고기 수입 재개라는 한국 정부의 결정에 항의하기 위해 5월과 6월 수천 수만의 한국민이 거리로 모여들 것이 그 저항의 출발점이었습니다. 이 대통령이 봉착한 정치적인 문제들은 모든 정당들이 국회의 상임위원회 구성을 놓고 때로는 주먹다짐을 벌이기도 하는 논란이 심한 협상에 들어감에 따라 계속되었습니다.

5. (기밀) 합당할 수도 아닐 수도 있지만, 남한사람들은 형편없는 내각 인선에서 재정위기((번역 주: 강만수 장관 재임시 폭발적인 원화의 평가절상 현상을 말하는 것이다.)), 악화일로의 북한 관계에 이르기까지 모든 일에 대해 이명박을 비난하는 경향이 있습니다. 이명박의 지지율은 지난 6개월 동안에 25퍼센트 주변을 맴돌았는데, 이는 1년 전만 해도 이명박이 유례없는 530만의 표차로(단 48퍼센트의 득표율) 자신의 최대 경쟁자를 물리치고 당선된 상황에서 180도 달라진 것입니다. 과거 수개월 동안 이 대통령은 국정 업무 처리 과정에서 권위를 회복하기로 마음을 다잡은 듯 보입니다. 그는 논란이 적은 다수 법안들을 통과시키는데 성공을 거뒀고, 국회는 업무를 위해 개원하였습니다. 다만 이명박이 다수의 이명박 표 개혁법안의 통과를 서두르지는 않는 모습입니다. 만일 이명박이 대중적 지지를 복원한다면 이명박 정부가 언론, 세제, 노동 그리고 교육을 다스리는 개혁 입법을 비롯한 파급력 있는 보수 의제를 실현할만한 권력으로 등장할 것입니다. 만일 그가 인기를 회복하지 못한다면, 이 대통령의 악전고투는 계속될 것이며 심지어 별 볼일 없이 될 수 있는데, 그 이유는 한국의 헌법은 단임제로 5년 임기만 허용하기 때문입니다.
===== 경제: 나쁜 소식 =====
6. (기밀) 세계 경제 침체는 무역에 의존하는 한국을 강타했습니다. 한국은 2008년 내내 가장 빠르게 성장하는 경제 국가 중 하나였습니다; 하지만 지난 6개월 만에 호된 침체에 빠져들었습니다. 한국선박, 반도체, 전자제품 그리고 자동차에 대한 국제적 수요는 급락했습니다. 한해 전과 비교해 1월만 한국의 수출량이 32퍼센트대로 떨어졌습니다. 국제통화기금은 올해 한국경제의 성장율이 4.0퍼센트 대로 줄어든다고 평가했는데 러시아를 제외한 가장 큰 하락 폭입니다. (한국정부 자체 평가는 대부분 민간부문의 분석과 마찬가지로 대략 2퍼센트 위축될 것으로 봅니다.) 한국 당국의 금융위기 대처는 수요를 촉진하고 신용을 지속하는 유의미한 조치를 비롯해 대게 금융 위기 대처에 경쟁력이 있는 편이지만, 한국 경제팀 지도부의 형편없는 정치력 발휘로((번역 주: 강만수 장관 재임시 폭발적인 원화의 평가절상 현상을 말하는 것이다.)) 그 빛을 잃었고 1월 중순에 그의 경제 팀이 개편되었고, 새로 취임한 경제팀은 대국민 홍보의((번역 주: public outreach )) 중요성을 더 잘 이해하는 듯합니다.

7. (기밀) 한국 경제의 경쟁력을 강화하겠다는 공약으로 당선된 이 대통령에게 이번 경제 위기에서 한 줄기 희망의 불빛이 있다면, 2008년에 상당한 저항에 봉착했던 경제 개혁안을 처리할 기회를 이번 경제 침체가 제공할 수 있을지입니다. 경제침체는 저임금의 중국과 최첨단 기술의 일본 사이에서 “샌드위치” 될 거라는 한국의 만성적인 우려를 더욱 가중시킬 뿐이었습니다. 한국과 미국을 놓고 보면 한국 내 “미국식 금융모델”에 대한 비판은 다른 나라들과는 다르게 제한적이며 다소 목소리를 잃었습니다. 아마도 한국 금융 모델이 대게 미국식 모델에 바탕을 두고 있기 때문일 것입니다. 사실상 어떤 면으로는 이번 금융 위기로 인해 한미 간의 경제적 유대관계의 중요성과 가치만 더욱 부각했습니다. 한국은 10월에 발표됐던 미 연방준비은행과 한국은행 간의 미화 300억 달러 통화스왑으로 미국이 한국의 재정위기를 구했다고 미국에 공을 돌리고 있습니다. 금융 위기에 대한 글로벌 경제 공조를 위한 첨병 역할로 (한국도 회원국) G20을 추진하는 게 바로 미국임을 역시 이해하고 있습니다. 한국인들은 우리를 G20에서 (2010년 한국이 의장국이다) 주요 파트너 상대로 보면서 초국가적인 금융 권한을 목표로 (주요 유럽의) 여타 급진적인 제안을 막아내기 위해 우리와 협력하길 바라고 있습니다.
===== FTA에 대한 마찰을 피하기 =====
8. (기밀) 한미 FTA를 놓고 양국의 민감한 사안은 더욱 첨예합니다. 2006년에 협상을 시작한 이래 2007년 한미 FTA 협정문에 서명했는데, 동 협정문은 한국에서 공공정책 쟁점 중의 하나로 미국에서보다 훨씬 많은 관심을 끌었습니다. 이 대통령과 대부분의 정치 지도층과 그리고 여론조사에서 FTA를 지지하는 한국민이 간발의 차로 다수이며, 그 이유는 동 협정이 미합중국과 유대를 강화하고 또한 한국경제가 더욱 경쟁력을 갖추도록 강제한다는 이유일 것입니다. FTA를 반대하는 한국인들은 이해관계자, 반세계화 옹호자, 반미주의자 등인데 미국의 수출 혜택이 한국의 것에 비해 거의 두 배임을 보여주는 미국 국제무역위원회를((번역 주: the U.S. International Trade Commission)) 포함한 모든 객관적인 분석들을 지적하면서 미국에 유리한 불균형한 거래라고 하며 주장하고 있습니다. 그리고 FTA가 미국보다는 한국에 더 커다란 변동을 요구할 것이라고 지적합니다. (한국은 FTA를 준수하려면 24개의 법을 바꿔야 할 것이고 미국은 실질적인 변동사항이 없습니다.) 마찬가지로 미국산 쇠고기를 한국시장에 완전히 개방하겠다는 이명박의 결정에 맞선―주요 아시아 시장에서 첫 번째이며 유일한 조치―지난여름 대중 집회는 쇠고기 수입 개방 결정이 또다시 한쪽 일방의 양보로 한국정부가 미국을 설득해 한미 FTA를 비준하려는 조치라는 인식이 부분적으로 작동한 것입니다.

9. (기밀) 그럼에도 이 대통령과 그의 각료들은 미국과의 강력한 경제 동반자 관계는 장기적으로 한국에 이득이 될 것이라고 계속해서 강변하고 있습니다. 한국정부는 FTA 비준 법안을 가을 국회에 보냈으며 표결 일정을 잡기 위해 고군분투하고 있습니다. 지난달 미국이 자동차 부문에서 “협상을 재개할” 필요가 있다는 미 의회에 서면으로 보낸 국무장관님의 성명은 이곳에서 다각도로 분석되었으며, 2월에 FTA 비준 표결 일정을 잡으려는 이 대통령의 시도에 반대세력이 퇴짜를 놓도록 만들었습니다. 그렇긴 하지만 한국 국회가 최종 비준할 가능성은 있을 듯합니다.

10. (기밀) 한국정부는 자동차 부문의 중요함과 미국 안에서 이 사안이 정치적으로 민감함을 이해하고 있습니다. 그러나 대체로 일을 진전시킬 만한 쉬운 방법을 찾지 못하고 있습니다. 미국이 FTA 협상에서 요구하는 자동차 관세와 자동차세, 자동차 기준((번역 주: 환경기준, 즉 다시 말하면 배기량 및 엔진용량을 관련된 기준을 말하는 것이다.)) 그리고 심지어 특별 집행절차((번역 주: 원상복귀 조항 즉, snapback 조항을 말하는 것이다. 요점만 말하면 한국차가 미국내 지나치게 판매량이 증가하면 관세를 원상복귀 시키는 조항이다. 자유무역이 아닌 일종의 ‘보호무역’조치이다. 말도 많고 탈도 많은 독소조항 중에 하나다.)) 등의 (자동차 조항은 모든 FTA 협정 중에서 가장 강력한 조항입니다.) 모든 것을 기본적으로 미국에 제공했음을 한국정부 관리들은 조용히 지적합니다. 그리고 이들이 모든 장벽을 제거해 주고 자국의 시장을 완전히 개방하는 모순적인 상황이 되면서, 한국 스스로 일본, 유럽 등의 보호주의 관행에 따른 비난보다 더 커다란 비난에 노출되고 말았습니다.

11. (기밀) 그럼에도 한국민은 FTA 협정에 대해 헌신적입니다. 미국의 요구에 대해 지나치게 굴종적이라는 국내의 비판에 대한 답변으로 정부의 공식적인 입장은 “재협상은 없다”는 견지를 유지하고 있는데, 한 쪽의 일방적인 양보로 보이지 않고 또 관리무역이 아니면 이번 테스트를 통과할 수 있다고 여기면서 진전 방안을 찾도록 미국과 협력하길 원한다는 뜻을 대사관은 감지했습니다. 단기적으론 이 대통령과 그의 장관들은 FTA가 양국 관계에서 어떤 문제가 되지 않도록 방지하길 원하고 있습니다. 그리고 동 협정과 관련 국무장관님이 난감한 상황에 부닥치지 않도록 할 것입니다. (그러나 불행하게도 한국 언론은 그런 예의범절을 보여주지 못할 것입니다.) 한국 당국자들은 국무장관님이 FTA 협정문을 공개적으로 승인하지 않으리라 이해하면서도, 국무장관께서 한미 FTA에 대해 사례를 표하고 FTA 관련해서 진전 방안을 찾는데 서로 의견을 나눌 수 있기를 희망할 것입니다. 단지 그 방안이 요구하는 내용에 관해 이렇게 이른 시점에 너무 세부 항목에 접근하지 않는 선에서 말입니다.
===== 북한 =====
12. (기밀) 대북정책은 거의 항상 남한 의제 중 가장 민감한 정책입니다. 55년간의 동맹임에도 한국 정부는 미국정부의 대북 정책 혹은 구상의 변화로 뒤통수를 맞거나 소외될까 여전히 두려워하고 있습니다. 간단히 말해 모든 미국 정부의 대북 정책 행보와 관련해 미국이 한국 정부에 알리고 상의하고 있다는 점이 남한 국민의 눈에 보여야 합니다. 한미 양국 정부가 대북 정책을 형성하고 구현하는 동반자가 되어야 한다면 청와대 입장에선 더할 나위 없는 일입니다. 이 대통령과 유명환 외교부 장관은 북한이 한미 사이를 갈라놓지 못하도록 한다는 미국정부의 다짐을 모색하고 있습니다. 오바마 정부가 북한의 완전한 비핵화 노력과 6자 회담의 가치를 중시한다는 국무부 장관님의 최근 성명을 환영하고 있습니다.

13. (기밀) 조기에 남북관계가 개선될 여지는 사실상 없습니다; 이 대통령은 “원칙”을 고수할 작정이며, 남북관계에서 한층 더 상호주의를 고집하고 있으며, 김정일은 북한 국내 사정에 비추어 이에 굴복하지 않을 것입니다. 중요한 점은 남한사람들이 북한의 계속되는 협박 조의 레토릭에 매우 지겨워하며 크게 개의치 않는 것처럼 보입니다. 그래서 정부의 대북 기조에 대게 불변해 하지 않습니다. 서해 상의 고조되는 긴장과 미사일 발사 준비 보도조차도 예상보다는 적은 국민적 불안감이 조성됐습니다. 한국정부는 6자 회담 복귀 요청을 결합한 단호하고 침착한 대북 공동 전선을 국무부 장관과 함께 제시할 기회를 환영할 것입니다.
===== 동맹의 발전 =====
14. (기밀) 반세기에 걸쳐 한미 동맹은 북동아시아에 평화와 번영을 위한 토대를 제공했습니다. 한국은 의심할 나위 없이 대표적인 수혜자입니다: 미국의 방패막이나 경제적 원조와 지원이 없었다면 “한강의 기적”이라는 경제적 성공도 한국 민주주의가 꽃피운 일도 불가능했을 것입니다. 미국 역시 혜택을 보았습니다. 주한미군은 동아시아 본토에 주둔한 유일한 군대이며, 남한은 주한미군 운영 비용 조로 수십억 달러를 출연하고 있습니다. 미국이 협력할 분야를 확대하기엔 지금이 적기입니다. 국무장관님이 이 대통령과 유명환 외교통상부 장관과 함께 한국이 글로벌 안보 역할을 확대할 태세가 되었다고 볼 수 있는 아래와 같은 분야의 논의를 원할 수도 있겠습니다.
  * 아프간: 고무적인 움직임이 나왔습니다. 이번 주 초 김성환 외교안보수석은 한국정부가 바그람에 병원과 경찰 훈련센터를 위한 새 부지 설정을 비롯해 여러 구급차와 오토바이 그리고 경찰 훈련요원 지원하는 등 아프간 현지에서 더 많은 훈련과 원조를 제공할 계획임을 스타인 버그 부장관에게 전했습니다. 미국은 한국의 지원이 더 많이 필요한 관계로 아프간 국군에 대한 금융 지원을 위해서 특별히 미국은 5년 동안 매해 미화 1억 달러를 요청했습니다. 미국은 한국정부 군 자산을 파견하길 역시 바라고 있습니다---미국은 정보감시정찰 장비를 논의해오고 있습니다. 그런 장비의 이동은 국회의 승인이 필요하므로 난관이 있겠지만, 이 대통령이 넘지 못할 정치 문제는 아닙니다.

  * 국제연합의 평화유지군 활동: 국회는 한국군이 입법부의 사전 승인 없이 평화유지군 임무를 위한 파병을 허가할 법안을 심사하고 있습니다. 한국은 2007년 이래로 레바논에 평화유지를 위해 367명을 지원했으며 전 세계적으로 다른 8곳에서 평화유지군 활동에 참여하고 있습니다. 2008년 1월 1일부로 한국은 출연금 평가에서 10번째로 큰 유엔 평화유지군 예산 공여국입니다.

  * 소말리아 해적과 전투: 한국은 소말리아 인근 해역 해적퇴치 연락그룹의 구성원입니다. 추가로 한국정부는 아덴만에 연합 해군 함대의 해상보안 작전의 일환으로 링스 헬리콥터와 고정식 고무보트를 장착한 4,500톤급 구축함을 파견할 계획입니다. 동 구축함은 310명까지 수송할 수 있습니다.

15. (기밀) 한국은 여타 글로벌 문제에서도 더 큰 역할을 원하고 있습니다. 국무장관께서 아래와 같은 괜찮은 영역에서 협력 증대를 제기할 수 있겠습니다.
  * 민주주의와 인권: 한국은 북한의 인권 문제 해결을 위한 새로운 준비를 선보이고 있습니다. 2008년 연례 유엔 총회에서 처음으로 대북인권결의안을 공동 제안으로 추진했습니다.

  * 기후변화: 한국은 9번째 가는 온실가스 배출국으로 글로벌 기후변화 논의에서 더욱 적극적인 역할을 수행할 준비가 되어 있습니다. 한국정부는 신재생 에너지에 대한 투자가 온실가스 배출량을 줄일 뿐만 아니라 일자리를 창출할 수 있고 경제성장을 촉진하고 에너지 안보를 강화해 줄 것으로 믿고 있습니다.

  * 개발원조: 한국의 해외 개발 원조사업은 공적개발원조 부문에서 거의 미화 5억 달러를 비롯해 대북 공적개발원조도 대략 비슷한 수치를 나타냅니다. 한국 정부의 목표는 2015년까지 공적개발원조를 세 배 늘리는 게 목표입니다. 기능 면이나 지역으로 제한된 역량 탓에 한국은 공적개발원조 공조에 관한 정책 논의에 수용적 자세이어야만 합니다.

  * 대량살상무기 반확산:((번역 주: Counter-Proliferation)) 한국정부는 이란정부의 우라늄 농축 활동을 수용할 수 없으며 5개 상임이사국 플러스 독일의((번역 주: P5-plus-1)) 일괄보상책을 지지한다고 기회가 닿을 때마다 이란 상대역에게 말해왔습니다.
===== 핵심 =====
16. (기밀) 남한은 우리와 생각도 비슷하고 심도 있고, 폭넓은 한미동맹을 원하고, 준비도 되어있는 활력이 넘치는 파트너입니다. 한국인들은 방위조약((번역 주: security arrangement)) 그 이상의 동맹 관계를 원합니다. 맞습니다. 한국인들은 자신들의 목소리를 더 내길 원하며, 심지어 “한층 동등한” 관계를 원하고 있지만, 이는 부분적인 이유에 불과합니다. 오히려 한국인들은 그 어느 때보다도 미국과의 유대관계가 한층 깊어졌다고 봅니다; 예를 들어 증거를 대보자면 이백만에 달하는 한국계 미국인 사회와 엄청난 한국인이 미국 유학을 하고 있습니다. 그러나 무엇보다도 남한 사람들 대다수는 한국과 미국이 가치와 전략적인 이해관계를 공유한다고 확신합니다. 지금이 한반도에 양국의 협력을 심화하는 과정에서 지금이 양국을 새로운 세계적 동반자 수준으로 관계를 격상시킬 적기입니다. 제가 보기엔 국무장관님의 방문이 한미동맹을 실질적으로 격상시키는 데 도움을 주는 역할을 할 것입니다. 지금이 우리의 글로벌 파트너쉽을 새로운 단계로 격상하고 한반도에서 우리의 협력을 심화할 때입니다. 국무장관님의 방문은 한미동맹을 실질적으로 격상시키는 산파 역할을 하게 될 것으로 저는 믿습니다. 국무장관님 서울 대사관 미국인과 한국인 일동은 당신을 만나 뵙길 고대하고 있습니다.

//스티븐스//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/13/09seoul228|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 원본 및 다운로드 =====
<code - 09SEOUL228.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000228 
 
 
FOR THE SECRETARY FROM AMBASSADOR STEPHENS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2019 
TAGS: PREL [External Political Relations], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs],
ECON [Economic Conditions], OVIP [Visits and Travel of Prominent Individuals and Leaders],
KS [Korea (South)] 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR THE SECRETARY'S VISIT TO KOREA 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Kathleen Stephens.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1.  (C) Madam Secretary, welcome to Korea.  Your decision to 
visit Seoul as one of your first stops after taking office is 
resonating well with all South Koreans, sending a strong 
signal of the importance you and the President place on our 
alliance with the ROK and on U.S. engagement in Asia.  You 
will be warmly welcomed by the South Korean public. 
President Lee and Foreign Minister Yu are eager to see you, 
and to get off to a strong start with the new Administration. 
 
¶2.  (C) The Republic of Korea (ROK), with its vibrant 
democracy, free market, high-tech economy, highly educated 
population, free press, and ever-deepening people-to-people 
ties with the United States, is a striking success story, not 
least for U.S. foreign policy.  Our intensive engagement with 
the ROK since its founding in 1948 exemplifies the importance 
of all three pillars you outlined recently in describing U.S. 
foreign policy:  defense, diplomacy, and development.  South 
Korea's success is based on a shared commitment to defense, 
as shown by the 28,000 US troops still on the Peninsula, the 
substantial development assistance the U.S. provided after 
the Korean War, and our close diplomatic cooperation to 
achieve a denuclearized North Korea and a more secure and 
prosperous future for the region. 
 
¶3.  (C) Now a developed country with a tested democratic 
system, South Korea increasingly has the capability as well 
as the political will to assume larger regional and global 
roles.  Your visit will encourage the Koreans to become even 
more active partners with us on issues ranging from human 
rights promotion to climate change to sea piracy to 
counter-terrorism.  We share values and strategic goals with 
this highly capable ally; we need to give substance to our 
shared aspiration to upgrade our bilateral relationship, 
putting it unmistakably into the first tier of U.S. allies. 
 
ROKG Domestic Context 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) There have been enormous domestic political changes 
over the past year in South Korea, with the conservative 
Grand National Party winning the executive and legislative 
branches of the government.  The transition has been bumpy. 
Resistance to the new conservative government of President 
Lee Myong Bak was almost immediate, beginning in the streets 
as tens of thousands of Koreans gathered in May and June to 
protest the government's decision to resume imports of U.S. 
beef.  Political problems for President Lee continued as all 
political parties engaged in contentious negotiations and on 
occasion fisticuffs over legislation and the structure of the 
National Assembly's committees. 
 
¶5.  (C) Fairly or unfairly, South Koreans tend to blame 
President Lee for everything, ranging from poor cabinet 
selections to the financial crisis to deteriorating relations 
with the North.  Lee's approval rating has hovered around 25 
percent for the past six months, a sharp turnaround from a 
year ago when he was elected with an unprecedented 5.3 
million vote margin of victory over his nearest rival 
(although still just 48 percent of the ballots cast).  In the 
past month or so, President Lee has shown himself determined 
to regain authority over the domestic political process.  He 
has succeeded in passing a number of less controversial laws, 
and the National Assembly is open for business, although not 
in a hurry to pass many of Lee's reform bills.  If Lee is 
able to rebuild popular support, his administration could 
emerge with the power to implement a far-reaching 
conservative agenda, including reforming laws governing the 
media, taxation, labor, and education.  If he fails, 
President Lee will continue to struggle and could even become 
irrelevant, because the Korean constitution allows for only a 
single five-year term in office. 
 
The Economy: Bad News 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) The global recession has hit trade-dependent Korea 
hard.  Korea was one of the fastest-growing economies in the 
OECD through most of 2008; in the last six months, it has 
tipped into recession with a vengeance.  Global demand for 
Korea's ships, semiconductors, electronics and cars has 
collapsed, with Korea's exports dropping by 32 percent in 
January compared to a year earlier.  The IMF is estimating 
that the Korean economy will shrink by 4.0 percent this year, 
the biggest drop among G20 economies besides Russia. (The 
ROKG's own estimate, as well as that of most private sector 
analysts, is roughly a 2 percent contraction).  Korean 
authorities'  generally competent handling of the financial 
crisis, including significant measures to boost demand and 
sustain credit, has been overshadowed by the poor political 
performance of its economic leadership team, leading 
President Lee to reshuffle his economic cabinet in 
mid-January.  The new economic team, which just took office, 
seems to better understand the importance of public outreach. 
 
¶7.  (C) If there's a silver lining to this economic crisis 
for President Lee, who was elected on a pledge to enhance the 
competitiveness of Korea's economy, it's that the recession 
might provide an opportunity for him to proceed with economic 
reforms that had encountered significant resistance in 2008. 
The recession has only exacerbated Korea's perennial concerns 
about being "sandwiched" between low-wage China and high-tech 
Japan.  Bilaterally, criticisms of "the U.S. financial model" 
in Korea have been limited and rather muted, unlike 
elsewhere, perhaps because the Korean model is largely based 
on the U.S. model.  In fact, to some extent the financial 
crisis has only highlighted for Koreans the importance and 
value of strong bilateral economic ties with the United 
States.  Koreans credit the U.S. with saving Korea's finances 
with a $30 billion currency swap deal announced in October 
between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Korea.  They also 
understand it was the U.S. that pushed for the G20, which 
includes Korea, to be the main vehicle for global economic 
coordination on the financial crisis.  The Koreans view us as 
their main partner in the G20, which Korea will chair in 
2010, and hope to work with us to fend off some other more 
radical proposals (mostly from Europe) for new supranational 
finance authorities. 
 
Avoiding Friction on the FTA 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) The bilateral sensitivities are more acute over the 
U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA).  Since the 
launch of negotiations in 2006, and the agreement's signing 
in 2007, the KORUS FTA has attracted far more attention in 
Korea, where it has been one of the top public policy issues, 
than in the United States.  President Lee, most of Korea's 
political leadership, and, polls show, a slender majority of 
the Korean public support the FTA, because it will both 
strengthen ties to the United States and force the Korean 
economy to become more competitive.  Korean opponents of the 
FTA -- vested interests, anti-globalization advocates, and 
anti-Americans -- have called the deal unbalanced in the U.S. 
favor, pointing out that all objective analyses (including 
the U.S. International Trade Commission) show that the export 
benefits will be roughly twice as great for the U.S. as for 
Korea, and noting that the FTA will require vastly more 
changes by Korea than by the U.S. (Korea will have to change 
24 laws to come into compliance with the FTA; the U.S. makes 
substantive changes to none).  Similarly, the public protests 
here last summer against President Lee's decision to fully 
open the Korean market to U.S. beef -- the first and only 
major Asian market to do so -- were in part driven by a 
perception that this was yet another one-sided concession the 
ROKG had made to persuade the U.S. to ratify KORUS. 
 
¶9.  (C) Nonetheless, President Lee and his cabinet have 
continued to argue forcefully that a stronger economic 
partnership with the United States is in Korea's long-term 
interests.  The ROKG sent the FTA ratification bill to 
Korea's National Assembly in the fall, and has been working 
hard to schedule a vote.  Your written statement to Congress 
last month that the U.S. needed to "reengage in negotiations" 
on autos was widely parsed here, and enabled the Opposition 
to rebuff President Lee's efforts to schedule an FTA 
ratification vote in February.  That said, eventual 
ratification by Korea's National Assembly seems likely. 
 
¶10.  (C) The ROKG understands the importance of the autos 
sector, and the political sensitivity of this issue in the 
U.S.   Substantively, however, they don't see an easy way 
forward.  ROKG officials quietly point out that Korea 
essentially gave the U.S. everything we asked for in the FTA 
negotiations, on auto tariffs, auto taxes, auto standards, 
and even a special enforcement mechanism (the autos 
provisions are some of the strongest in the entire FTA).  And 
they find it ironic that by offering to remove all barriers 
and open its market entirely, Korea has opened itself up to 
greater criticism than the protectionist practices of Japan 
or Europe. 
 
¶11.  (C) The Koreans nonetheless remain committed to this 
agreement.  While the official line remains "no 
renegotiation" (to answer domestic criticisms of excessive 
deference to U.S. wishes), we sense President Lee will want 
to work with us to find a way forward, assuming it can pass 
the smell test of not being managed trade, and not look like 
too one-sided a concession.  In the near term, President Lee 
and his ministers want to prevent the FTA from being a 
problem in the bilateral relationship, and will likely try to 
avoid putting you on the spot over the agreement (although 
the Korean press may show no such deference, unfortunately). 
They in turn, while understanding you won't endorse the FTA 
text, hope that you'll be able to communicate an appreciation 
of the FTA and an interest in finding a way forward on it, 
without getting too specific at this early juncture about 
what that will require. 
 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
¶12.  (C) North Korea policy is almost always the most 
sensitive issue on the South Korean agenda.  Fifty-five years 
of alliance notwithstanding, the ROKG still fears being left 
out or caught surprised by Washington's initiatives or policy 
changes on North Korea.  Simply put, the ROKG must be seen by 
South Koreans as informed and consulted on all USG moves on 
North Korea.  Even better for the Blue House, Washington and 
Seoul should be partners in forming and implementing policies 
toward the North.  President Lee and FM Yu are looking for an 
affirmation from you that Washington will not allow Pyongyang 
to drive a wedge between us.  They welcome your recent 
statements on the value of the Six Party Talks and the 
importance the Obama Administration places on complete 
denuclearization of North Korea. 
 
¶13.  (C) There is virtually no chance of early improvement in 
South-North relations; President Lee is determined to stick 
to &principle8 and to insist on a more reciprocal 
relationship with the North, and Kim Jong-il will not give in 
for his own domestic reasons.  Importantly, South Koreans 
appear quite tired of, but not particularly bothered by, the 
continuing threatening rhetoric from the North, and therefore 
seem largely comfortable with their government's stance. 
Even press reports of heightening tensions in the West Sea 
and of missile launch preparations have created less public 
anxiety than might be expected.  The ROKG will welcome the 
opportunity to present with you a united front of calm and 
determination toward the North, combined with a call to 
return to the Six Party Talks. 
 
Advancing the Alliance 
---------------------- 
 
¶14. (C) For over half a century the U.S.-ROK alliance has 
provided the foundation for peace and prosperity in Northeast 
Asia.  The ROK is undoubtedly a major beneficiary; neither 
the economic "Miracle on the Han" nor Korea,s democratic 
flowering would have been possible absent a U.S. defense 
shield and economic assistance and support.  The U.S. too has 
benefited.  USFK (U.S. Forces in Korea) is our only troop 
presence in mainland East Asia, and South Korea contributes 
billions of dollars to USFK operating expenses.  The time is 
right to expand the areas in which we cooperate.  You may 
want to discuss with President Lee and Foreign Minister Yu 
the following areas where the ROK may be ready to increase 
its global security role: 
 
-- Afghanistan:  There have been some encouraging movements. 
Earlier this week, ROK National Security Advisor Kim 
Sung-hwan told Deputy Secretary Steinberg about ROKG plans to 
provide more assistance and training in Afghanistan, 
including setting up a new site for a hospital and a training 
center in Bagram, and contributing ambulances, motorcycles, 
and police trainers.  We need a lot more from the Koreans, 
however, especially financial support for the Afghan Army, 
for which we have requested USD 100 million a year for five 
years.  We would also like to see ROKG military assets 
deployed -- we have been discussing an ISR unit 
(intelligence, surveillance and reconnaisance). Such a 
deployment will need National Assembly approval, which will 
pose difficult, but not insurmountable, political problems 
for President Lee. 
 
-- UN Peacekeeping Operations:  The National Assembly is 
deliberating on a bill that will allow the ROK military to be 
 
deployed for peacekeeping missions without prior legislative 
approval.  The ROK has contributed 367 soldiers for 
peacekeeping in Lebanon since 2007 and is participating in 
eight other PKO operations around the world.  As of January 
1, 2008 the ROK was the 10th largest provider of assessed 
contributions to the UN PKO budget. 
 
-- Combating Piracy off Somalia:  The ROK is a member of the 
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. 
Additionally, the ROKG plans to deploy a 4,500 ton class 
destroyer equipped with a Lynx helicopter and rigid 
inflatable craft to the Gulf of Aden to be part of the 
maritime security operations of the combined maritime forces. 
 The destroyer will carry up to 310 personnel. 
 
¶15.  (C) The ROK also wants to play a bigger role on other 
global issues.  You might raise the following as good areas 
for increased cooperation. 
 
-- Democracy and Human Rights: The ROK has demonstrated a new 
readiness to address human rights concerns in the DPRK, 
co-sponsoring the annual UNGA North Korea human rights 
resolution in 2008 for the first time. 
 
-- Climate Change:  Korea, as the ninth largest emitter of 
greenhouse gases, is ready to play a more active role in 
discussions on global climate change.  The ROKG believes that 
investment in new and renewable energy sources not only will 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but also can create jobs, 
spur economic growth, and enhance energy security. 
 
-- Development Assistance:  Korea's overseas development 
assistance program currently includes nearly USD 500 million 
in Official Development Assistance (ODA), as well as a 
roughly similar figure for North Korea.  The ROKG target is 
to triple ODA by 2015.  With limited functional and regional 
capacity, Korea should be receptive to policy discussions on 
ODA coordination. 
 
-- Counter-Proliferation:  The ROKG has told Iranian 
counterparts at every opportunity that Tehran's uranium 
enrichment activities are unacceptable and supported the 
P5-plus-1 incentives package. 
 
The Bottom Line 
--------------- 
 
¶16.  (C) South Korea is a like-minded, energetic partner that 
is ready, prepared, and wants to have a broader and deeper 
alliance with the United States.  Koreans would like the 
alliance to be a lot more than a security arrangement.  Yes, 
they want more say, even a &more equal8 relationship, but 
this is only part of the reason.  Rather, they see that their 
ties with the U.S. are deeper now than ever; witness, for 
example, the two million-strong Korean American community, 
and the enormous numbers of Koreans studying in the United 
States.  Above all, however, a very large majority of South 
Koreans are convinced that the ROK and the United States have 
shared values and shared strategic interests.  It,s time to 
take the relationship to a new level in our global 
partnership, even as we deepen our cooperation on the Korean 
peninsula.  Your visit, I believe, will play an instrumental 
role in materially upgrading the U.S.-ROK alliance. 
 
Madam Secretary, all of us at Embassy Seoul, Americans and 
Koreans, are looking forward to seeing you. 
 
STEPHENS
</code>