^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1784  |  2009-11-09  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 9일 ======

미분류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001784

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울, [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84014|언론 보도: 2009년 11월 9일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/04/16 01:32//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 동아일보, 세계일보, 서울신문
'4대강' 내일 착공;환경영향평가 최종 통과 

중앙일보
[[http://news.joins.com/article/3865283 http://www.pdjournal.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=24872|노조 전임자 임금 준 기업 명단 공개하고 사법처리]]

한국일보
정운찬·정몽준 포함 당·정·청 6인 한밤 회동 '세종시' 논의

한겨레 신문
4대강 환경평기 ‘부실·졸속’

===== 국내 동향 =====

초당 모임인 미 하원의원 88명은 11월 18일 방한을 앞두고 있는 오바마 대통령에게 한미 FTA 비준을 서둘러 줄 것을 촉구하는 서신을 보냈다. (전체)

로렌스 서머스 미국 국가경제위원회 의장은 지난 6일 한미재계회의 총회에서 "미국 정부는 한.미 FTA 비준을 위해 준비하고 있다"고 [[http://www.yonhapnews.co.kr/economy/2009/11/08/0302000000AKR20091108028800003.HTML|밝혔다.]] (중앙, 동아, 한국)

미 자동차 산업의 본산으로 GM과 포드 본사가 위치한 미시간 주 출신 의원 등 12명의 상하원 의원은 같은 날 “한미 FTA를 수정해야 한다”고 주장했다. (동아, 한겨레, 세계, 서울)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

미국을 방문한 한국 정부 고위 당국자는 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표가 강석주 북한 외무성 제1부상을 만나기 위해 평양을 방문할 예정임을 미국이 조만간에 발표할 예정이라고 워싱턴 특파원에게 밝혔다. ([[http://news.joins.com/article/3865274|중앙]])

제프리 베이더 미국 백악관 국가안보회의(NSC) 아시아담당 선임보좌관은 6일(현지 시간) 워싱턴에서 개최된 세미나에서 “북한과 직접 대화할 준비가 돼 있다”고 말했다. ([[http://news.donga.com/Politics_List/3/00/20091109/23977946/1|동아]], 한겨레, 세계, 서울, MBC)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

한국 언론 전체는 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 방북이 성사된다면 오바마 대통령의 순방 이후 "몇 주 안에" 이뤄질 것이라며 북미 대화와 관련해 [[http://www.tongilnews.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=87255|"곧 발표를 하게 될 것"]]이라는 11월 5일 발언을 7일 보도했다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 관련하여 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표가 강석주 북한 외무성 제1부상을 만나기 위해 평양을 방문할 예정임을 미국이 조만간에 발표할 예정이라고 한국 정부 고위 당국자가 워싱턴 특파원에게 밝혔다고 전했다.

제프리 베이더 미국 백악관 국가안보회의(NSC) 아시아담당 선임보좌관이 6일(현지 시간) “북한과 직접 대화할 준비가 돼 있다”며 “북-미 대화의 시기와 방법은 동맹국과 협의하고 있다”고 [[http://news.donga.com/Politics_List/3/00/20091109/23977946/1|밝혔다]]는 소식이 널리 소개되었다.

==== 미·일 동맹 ====

보수 조선일보 오늘자 사설: "하토야마 총리가 미·일동맹의 중요성 자체를 부인하는 것은 아니다. 그는 "미·일동맹은 일본 외교의 기축(基軸)"이란 말을 되풀이하고 있다. 그러나 지난 55년간 세계에서 가장 견고한 관계로 평가돼 온 미·일동맹이 전환기적 진통을 겪고 있는 것은 분명하다. …하토야마 신(新)외교 포석의 배후에는 '미국 일변도 외교'만으로는 '중국의 부상(浮上)'이라는 21세기의 새로운 정세 속에서 일본의 활로(活路)를 개척하기 어렵다는 일본 내의 새로운 인식이 작용하고 있다."

==== 베를린 장벽 붕괴 20돌 ====

[[http://news.donga.com/3/all/20091109/23978473/2|보수 동아일보 사설]]: "냉전이 낳은 분단의 고통을 지구촌에서 유일하게 여태껏 짊어지고 있는 우리로서는 베를린 장벽 붕괴 20주년을 맞아 남다른 상념에 젖을 수밖에 없다. …동서독 간 인적교류와 협력의 확대가 통일의 발판이 됐다. …안타깝게도 한반도 남북의 통일을 둘러싼 환경은 혼란스럽기만 하다. 김정일 북한 국방위원장은 3대 세습을 꾀하며 핵무장 카드로 세계와 대결하고 있다. ([[http://english.donga.com/List/3/all/26/263697/1|영어 버전]]에 첨가된 표현: 전체주의 북한 정권에 세뇌된) 2400만 북한 주민은 해마다 굶주려 죽지 않기 위해 안간힘을 다해야 하는 처참한 신세다. …1960년대만 해도 북한의 1인당 국민소득이 남한을 웃돌았지만 지금은 지옥과 천국을 연상시킬 정도로 역전됐다. …통일은 (독일처럼) 갑자기 닥칠 수도 있다. 어느 방식이더라도 혼란을 최소화하면서 통일을 맞을 준비를 치밀하게 하지 않으면 안 된다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[중앙일보 사설] 미국의 ‘한국사령부’, 안보 도움되지만 부담도** (중앙일보, 2009년 11월 7일, 38면)

미국이 주한 미8군의 주둔지를 하와이로 옮기려던 계획을 바꿔 한국에 잔류시키기로 했다. 또 주한미군을 통합 지휘하는 ‘한국사령부’(KORCOM)를 내년 6월 창설키로 했다. <본지 11월 6일자 1면> 2012년으로 예상되는 전시작전통제권(전작권) 이양과 맞물려 발생할 수 있는 한반도의 안보 공백을 줄이는 한편 미국의 세계적인 군사전략에 맞춰 주한미군을 개편하려는 것이다. 이에 따라 2015년에 완공되는 평택 미군기지는 주일미군 등이 담당하는 해외 발진기지 역할을 상당 부분 떠맡을 전망이다. 주한미군에 이른바 ‘전략적 유연성’을 부여함으로써 평택기지를 미국의 항구적인 동북아시아 전진기지로 활용한다는 의미다. 북한의 존재와 강대국에 둘러싸인 한국의 지정학적 위치를 감안할 때 미국의 계획은 기본적으로 우리 안보에 이익이 될 것으로 판단된다. 그러나 동시에 몇 가지 부담도 예상된다. 주한미군의 개편에 상응하는 정부 차원의 치밀한 대응이 필요하다.

우선 전작권 이양에 따른 부담이다. 현재의 한미연합사령부는 유사시 주한미군 사령관이 연합사령관 자격으로 주한미군과 해외에서 급파될 전 세계의 미군, 그리고 한국군을 통합적으로 지휘하게 된다. 전 세계 미군이 보유한 첨단 정보 능력과 전투 능력을 가장 효율적으로 활용할 수 있는 것이다. 전작권 이양 뒤에는 이 지휘체계가 한국군과 미군으로 이원화됨으로써 효율성이 약화될 가능성이 있다. 또 한·미상호방위조약은 한국이 공격받을 경우 미국이 자동 개입하도록 규정하고 있지만 이는 이론적 차원이며 연합사령부의 존재는 이를 실질적으로 보장하는 장치가 된다. 북한의 도발 가능성을 실질적으로 억제하는 효과가 있는 것이다. 전작권 이양으로 이런 효과가 조금이라도 약화되는 것을 막기 위한 대책이 필요하다. 최소한 한반도에 평화체제가 정착될 때까지 이양 시기를 늦추는 것이 가장 좋은 방안이라고 본다.

또 미군의 한국사령부 창설은 우리의 중장기적인 외교안보 활동 공간을 제약하는 측면이 있다. 예컨대 미국의 해외 전진기지가 구축됨으로써 중국과 러시아 등 인접한 강대국들과 관계에 부정적 영향을 미칠 수 있다. 이는 우리가 주한미군을 필요로 하는 한 불가피한 일이다. 그렇더라도 이런 부작용을 최소화하기 위한 정부의 유연한 대처가 긴요하다.

마지막으로 한국이 미군의 해외발진기지 역할을 하게 됨으로써 국내외적으로 논란이 이는 것을 방지해야 한다. 일부에서 ‘한국사령부’의 창설을 두고 우리가 미국의 군사적 종속국으로 전락하는 것으로 폄하할 우려가 있다. 자칫 이런 논리에 함몰돼선 안 된다. 서유럽국가들과 일본 등 많은 나라가 자국의 필요에 따라 미군의 해외 전진기지 역할을 스스로 감수하고 있음을 기억해야 한다. 특히 우리가 독자적으로 감당하기 어려운 안보수요를 충족시키려면 미국과 군사적 동맹을 유지, 강화하는 것이 가장 현명한 선택이라는 점을 유념해야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 흔들리는 美·日동맹을 보며 한반도를 생각한다**(조선일보, 2009년 11월 9일, 35면)

오바마 미국 대통령의 13~14일로 예정된 일본 방문을 앞두고, 미국과 일본 간에 전례 없는 긴장감이 감돌고 있다. 하토야마 유키오 일본 총리가 지난 9월 취임 이후 "지금까지 일본은 미국에 너무 의존해 왔다"며 "대등한 미·일(美·日)관계를 추구하겠다"는 입장을 거듭 밝혀왔기 때문이다. 지난 29일 일본 의회 답변에서 "미·일동맹의 방향에 대한 포괄적 리뷰(재검토)가 필요하다"고도 했다.

하토야마 내각은 오키나와의 후텐마(普天間) 미군기지를 오키나와 내 다른 지역으로 옮기기로 한 지난 2006년 미·일 합의에 대해서도 수정을 요구하고 나섰다. 집권 민주당 일부에선 후텐마 기지를 아예 일본 밖으로 옮겨야 한다고 주장하고 있다. 미국으로선 아시아 주둔 미군 재편 전략의 기본 틀이 위협받는 상황을 맞은 것이다.

미·일은 최근 워싱턴에서 외무장관 회담을 갖는다고 발표해 놓고 이를 취소하는 사태를 빚기까지 했다. 미·일 간의 균열이 응급 외교를 통해 서둘러 봉합할 수 있는 성격 이상의 균열이라는 진단도 나오고 있다. 최근 미국 정부와 언론은 "일본은 더 이상 과거의 일본이 아니다" "이제 미국의 골칫거리는 중국이 아니라 일본"이라는 격한 비난을 쏟아내고 있다. 미국은 지금까지 미·일 동맹을 아시아 전략의 기본 축(軸)으로 삼아왔기 때문에 일본의 이상(異常) 반응에 더욱 신경이 곤두선 듯한 느낌이다.

그러나 하토야마 총리 역시 오바마 정부의 아프가니스탄 전쟁 확대 방안에 대해 "군사적 방법으로 해결하려는 데 대해서 부정적"이라고 말하는 등 "미국에 대해 할 말은 하겠다"는 기조(基調)를 굽히지 않고 있다. 하토야마와 민주당 내각은 미·일동맹의 수정을 꾀하는 한편, 한·중·일 협력을 축으로 하는 '동(東)아시아 공동체'를 추진하겠다고 나섰다.

하토야마 총리가 미·일동맹의 중요성 자체를 부인하는 것은 아니다. 그는 "미·일동맹은 일본 외교의 기축(基軸)"이란 말을 되풀이하고 있다. 그러나 지난 55년간 세계에서 가장 견고한 관계로 평가돼 온 미·일동맹이 전환기적 진통을 겪고 있는 것은 분명하다. 일본의 이 같은 움직임을 하토야마 총리의 '원맨쇼'로만 보기 어렵다. 하토야마 신(新)외교 포석의 배후에는 '미국 일변도 외교'만으로는 '중국의 부상(浮上)'이라는 21세기의 새로운 정세 속에서 일본의 활로(活路)를 개척하기 어렵다는 일본 내의 새로운 인식이 작용하고 있다.

하토야마는 지난 8월 "미국 주도의 세계화 시대는 막을 내리고 다극(多極) 체제를 향해 나아가고 있다"고 주장했다. 미국이 2001년 9·11 테러 이후 이라크와 아프가니스탄 2개의 전쟁에 발이 묶이고, 지난해 발생한 금융위기를 겪으면서 미국 주도의 정치·군사·경제적 세계 질서가 동요하고 있다는 정세관(情勢觀))의 표현이다. 사실 일본은 자민당 정권하에서도 미국의 외교 정책이 일본 중시(重視)냐 중국 중시냐에 신경을 곤두세워 왔다. 그런 일본은 미국에 오바마 정권이 들어선 다음 미국의 대중 정책이 일면(一面) 견제·일면 협력의 양면적(兩面的) 성격에서 중국을 전략적 파트너 관계로 격상(格上)시켜 세계 문제를 중국과의 G2(주요 2개국) 회담에서 본격 논의하기 시작하자 상당한 외교적 충격을 받았다. 하토야마가 일본 근·현대 외교 전통인 탈아입구(脫亞入歐) 노선을 100년 만에 탈미입아(脫美入亞)로 전환해 보겠다고 시도하는 것은 미국의 패권적 지위 동요 때문만이 아니라 미국의 대중 정책의 변화에 대한 일본 나름의 선제적(先制的) 대응이란 성격도 갖고 있다.

하토야마의 신외교가 장차 어떤 모습으로 현실화할지, 아니면 일시적 전통 이탈(離脫)을 거쳐 원래의 대미 경사(傾斜) 외교로 되돌아갈지는 더 지켜봐야 할 일이다. 그러나 한국·중국·일본이 미국과 맞물려 형성하고 있는 동북아 정세에도 조만간 크든 작든 변화의 흐름이 밀려들 것만은 분명하다. 우리는 미래의 한반도 통일까지 대비해야 하는 차원에서도 미국의 쇠퇴와 중국의 부상이 각각 어떤 속도로 진행돼 어떤 변화를 동반할 것인지에 대한 명확한 전망 아래서 국가 전략을 조율(調律)해 나가야 한다. 지금 한·일해협 건너에서 미·일동맹이 빚어내는 균열음은 유동화(流動化)·다변화(多邊化)·복잡화하는 동북아 정세 속에서 대한민국 국가전략 수립의 지난(至難)함을 일깨워주는 신호라고 할 수 있다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 한·인도 CEPA 비준, 이제는 한·미 FTA다**(중앙일보, 2009년 11월 9일, 33면)

국회가 지난 6일 본회의에서 사실상 만장일치(찬성 192, 기권 5표)로 한·인도 포괄적 경제동반자 협정(CEPA) 비준 동의안을 통과시킴으로써 내년 초부터 인구 12억 명의 인도 시장이 열리게 됐다. CEPA는 자유무역협정(FTA)과 동일한 효력을 지니는 통상협정으로 이번에 국회가 비준 동의안을 처리하지 못했다면 발효 시기가 2011년으로 1년 늦춰질 수밖에 없었다. 여야가 정쟁을 벌이는 와중에도 한·인도 CEPA 비준안을 압도적인 찬성으로 통과시킨 것은 국익이 걸린 사안에서는 얼마든지 협력적인 의정 활동을 펼칠 수 있음을 보여 준 귀중한 사례다. 국회가 시한을 넘기지 않고 한·인도 CEPA 비준안을 신속하게 처리한 것에 박수를 보낸다.

내년부터 한·인도 CEPA가 발효됨에 따라 우리나라는 세계 4위의 구매력을 지닌 인도 시장에서 경쟁국들보다 유리한 고지를 선점할 수 있게 됐다. 한국이 주요 경쟁국 가운데 가장 먼저 인도와 자유무역의 문호를 열었기 때문이다. 이제 관심은 이미 협상을 타결한 한·미 FTA와 한·유럽연합(EU) FTA의 비준에 모아지고 있다. 최근 협상을 마무리 지은 한·EU FTA에 대해서는 국내의 반발이 크지 않아 국회 비준에 큰 어려움이 없을 것으로 보이지만 그보다 앞서 타결된 한·미 FTA는 한국과 미국 양국에서 모두 비준에 난항을 겪고 있다.

그러나 미국 하원의원 88명이 버락 오바마 대통령에게 비준 촉구서한을 보낸 것을 계기로 미국 내의 분위기가 호전되고 있다. 로런스 서머스 미 국가경제위원장도 최근 워싱턴에서 열린 한·미 재계회의에서 “미국 정부가 한·미 FTA 비준을 위한 준비를 하고 있다”고 밝혀 미국 내 비준 절차에 진전이 있음을 시사했다. 문제는 우리 국회가 지난 4월 상임위를 통과한 비준 동의안을 6개월이 지나도록 본회의에 상정조차 하지 못하고 있다는 점이다. 여야는 이번 한·인도 CEPA 비준안 처리에서 보여 준 ‘국익 우선’의 정신을 한·미 FTA 비준에도 발휘해 미국 측의 비준을 이끌어 내기 바란다. 그것이 일하는 국회의 참모습이다.

===== 특집 (역주: 한국경제신문이 영어 인터뷰 내용을 날조했으니 주의 바람)  =====

**[[http://db.hankyung.com/news/app/newsview.php?aid=2009110834581&sid=&cid=|캐서린 스티븐스 주한 미국대사 "한국 '비즈환경' 개선 놀라워" "G20 개최는 글로벌 중심 도약 신호"]]**
(한국경제신문, 2009년 11월 9일, 33면)

스스로를 '천성이 낙천적인 사람'이라고 말하는 캐서린 스티븐스 주한 미국 대사(56).지난 주말 취임 1주년(9월23일) 인터뷰를 위해 대사관 집무실을 들어서자 벽 중앙에 걸린 포근한 수묵화가 먼저 눈에 들어왔다. 그는 "30년 만에 예산중학교를 방문했을 때 제자들이 취임 기념으로 선물한 이 그림은 내 마음의 고향"이라며 활짝 웃었다.

'한국의 문화수준이 경제성장을 따라가지 못한다는 지적이 있다'는 기자의 질문에 "한국 문화수준은 1970년대에도 매우 높았다"며 감싸는 모습에선 한국이름(심은경)이 있는 최초의 미국 대사라는 수식어에 걸맞은 진한 한국사랑이 느껴졌다.

▼취임 1주년 소감은.

"부임 당시는 리먼 브러더스 파산 사태 직후여서 한국과 미국 모두 경제 문제에 대한 걱정이 많았습니다. 1년을 보내면서 한국 정부가 경제위기에 대처하는 신속하고 결단력 있는 모습에 깊은 인상을 받았습니다. 1970년대 한국에 처음 왔을 때도 한국이 참 빨리 변하는 나라라는 생각이 들었습니다. 당시 한국인들은 가난했지만 민주화와 경제적 번영에 대한 열망이 강했습니다. 하지만 오늘날 한국의 경제발전과 민주주의의 진전은 30년 전 기대치를 훨씬 능가하는 수준입니다. 특히 내년에 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의 개최지로 선정된 건 하이라이트죠.한국이 국제무대의 중심국이 될 거라는 빠른 신호(early sign)로 해석됩니다. "

▼평화봉사단 활동을 하면서 외교관이 되겠다고 결심하셨다는데.

"1970년대 미국은 베트남 전쟁을 놓고 두 갈래로 분열된 상황이었습니다. 대학을 갓 졸업한 제가 평화봉사단의 일원으로 한국행을 택한 이유도 동아시아 정세에 관심이 높았던 시대적 상황과 관련이 깊습니다. 동아시아가 앞으로 미국에 중요한 지역으로 떠오를 것이란 걸 예감했습니다. 하지만 역사와 문화가 다른 나라를 이해하는 건 어려운 일입니다. 저는 그때 남자 중학교에서 근무했는데 교실당 70명에 이르는 학생들을 지도하기 위해 교사들의 체벌이 빈번하게 이뤄지는 걸 보고 큰 충격을 받았습니다. 이 상황에서 어떻게 대응할 것인지를 결정하는건 쉽지 않은 일입니다. 동료 교사를 설득할 것인지,체벌이 이뤄지는 교무실을 박차고 나갈 것인지 등 해결책을 찾아야 합니다. 하지만 한 가지 정답은 없습니다. 외교의 원칙도 마찬가지라고 생각합니다. 서로 다른 사회와 문화를 이해하기 위해선 각각의 상황과 목표에 따라 접근방식을 수정하는 게 외교에서도 매우 중요하다는 걸 느꼈습니다. "

▼이명박 정부와 오바마 행정부의 궁합은 잘 맞다고 보시는지요. 

"오바마 대통령은 첫 한국 방문에 남다른 관심을 갖고 계십니다. 그는 눈부신 경제발전을 이룬 한국의 성과에 강한 존경심을 표시했습니다. 아직 이번 방한 기간에 무엇을 논의할지 확정되진 않았지만 글로벌 경제위기 대처와 G20 정상회의 한국 개최,북핵문제 해결을 위한 협력 방안 등이 폭넓게 다뤄질 것으로 예상됩니다. 이 대통령과 오바마 대통령은 개인적으로도 돈독한 친분을 맺고 있으며 만남의 기회를 이어가고 있습니다. "

▼한 · 미 FTA가 협상 타결 2년째를 맞았는데도 별 진척이 없습니다.

오바마 대통령 방문때 '깜짝 소식'을 기대해도 될는지요.

"한 · 미 FTA가 타결된 뒤 양국 정권이 바뀌었고 금융위기가 터졌으며, 미국 자동차 산업은 어려움에 처했습니다. 미국 의회의 비준이 늦어진 것도 이와 무관치 않습니다. 미국 내에선 여전히 자동차 문제에 대한 우려가 큰 상황입니다. 

하지만 올 1월부터 론 커크 미 무역대표부(USTR) 대표가 한덕수 주한 미 대사 등 관계자를 여러차례 만나 이 문제를 심도있게 논의했고 최근 USTR가 미국 모든 주의 업종별 단체와 주요 기업들을 대상으로 의견을 물은 결과 대부분이 한 · 미 FTA에 동의했습니다. 금융위기로 미국 자동차 산업이 엄청난 타격을 입었지만 상대적으로 한국 자동차업계는 (미국 시장에서) 잘 헤쳐나가고 있습니다. 한국 완성차 업체가 미국에 투자를 많이 하고 있는 것도 반가운 일입니다. 양국 정상들이 중요성을 공감하고 있는 만큼 정상회담에서 진전이 있을 것으로 기대합니다. "

▼워싱턴에선 북한 체제 붕괴 가능성과 김정일 사후 비상계획 등과 관련해 어떤 준비를 하고 있는지요. 

"지난 6월 오바마 대통령과 이명박 대통령은 민주주의와 시장경제를 바탕으로 한 한반도의 평화통일과 남북화해 달성 목표를 공유한다고 발표했습니다. 미국은 한국의 동맹국으로 (김정일 국방위원장 사망 등) 유사 상황에 대비해야 할 책임이 있습니다. 하지만 외교는 어디까지나 현재 벌어진 상황을 다루는 것이 최우선인 만큼 무엇보다 북한이 비핵화를 위한 협상 테이블에 복귀하고 9 · 19 공동성명(2005년)과 2 · 13 합의사항(2007년)을 지키는 것이 시급하다고 생각합니다. 6자회담은 북핵문제 해결과 한반도 평화를 위한 최선의 해결책입니다. 북한이 6자회담에 복귀하는 건 북한 사회에도 엄청난 기회를 제공할 것입니다. "

▼'한국은 기업하기 어려운 나라'라는 인식이 현 정부가 들어선 이후 어느 정도 개선됐다고 보십니까. 

"1987년부터 2년간 부산의 주한 미 영사관에 근무할 당시 한국에 진출한 외국계 기업들로부터 한국의 기업환경에 대한 불만의 목소리를 자주 들었습니다. 한국의 경직된 관료주의와 의사결정 과정의 불투명성,외국계 기업 차별 등이 문제로 지적됐었죠.하지만 작년에 취임 후 암참(AMCHAM · 주한 미국상공회의소) 등 미국계 기업 단체들과 만난 뒤 한국의 비즈니스 환경 변화에 깜짝 놀랐습니다. 최근엔 미 기업인들의 불평을 듣지 못했습니다. 이 대통령은 최근 암참 연례행사에 참석해 기업하기 좋은 환경을 만들겠다는 비전을 밝혀 글로벌 기업들에 긍정적인 메시지를 전달하기도 했습니다. 정말 많이 변했죠."(웃음)<WRAP center round info 90%>//**이명박에 아부하는 것인가? 취재에 따른 객관적 사실을 털어놓은 것인가? 어찌 됐건 날조된 인터뷰 번역임에는 틀림없다**//For some time, there was a perception among foreign firms that Korea is a country that is really difficult to do business in.
▼'한국은 기업하기 어려운 나라'라는 인식이 

Do you see any improvement or progress made since the inauguration of the Lee Myung-bak Administration?
 현 정부가 들어선 이후 어느 정도 개선됐다고 보십니까. 

"In the 1980s in Busan, where I dealt with American businesses quite a bit, I heard this kind of complaint quite a bit, that it was difficult to deal with some of the Korean bureaucracies, rules were unclear, and there was a lot of concern about possible unfavorable treatment to foreign businesses.
"제가 미국 기업의 문제를 다뤘을 당시인 1980년대에는(1987년부터 2년간 부산의 주한 미 영사관에 근무할 당시) 그와 같은 볼맨 소리를 꾀나 나왔습니다. 한국의 관료주의와 불명확한 규제, 외국계 기업 차별 등에 대처하기가 어려웠습니다.

One heard many complaints like this from foreign businesses, including American businesses.
미국 사업체나 외국계 사업체들로부터 그와 같은 불평이 꽤 나왔었습니다.

There was (also) concern about the labor scene.
노동 문제에 대한 우려도 있었습니다.

I have been very impressed since I came back last year... by how much that has changed.
작년 한국에 돌아온 이후로 그런 상황이 상당히 달라진 것을 보고 매우 인상 깊었다.

So I think, in some way, that the perception that you just described is still out there, that in some quarters (doing business in Korea) is very tough.
그렇지만, 당신이 설명한 (기업 환경이 쉽지 않다는) 일부 인식이 여전히 남아있고, 일부 영역에서 기업하기가 매우 힘겹기도 했습니다.

But, in fact, if you talk to the companies who are actually doing business here I don't hear that complaint.
그러나 실상 이곳에서 사업하는 기업체 사람들과 얘기를 나눠보니 그런 불만을 듣지 못했습니다.

So I think the situation has actually gotten steadily better over the years from the point of view of the international business environment.
그러니 국제 비즈니스 환경 측면에서 보면 실제로 지난 세월에 걸쳐 사업 여건이 꾸준히 나아졌다는 것이 내 생각입니다.

Certainly President Lee Myung-bak and his administration have done a number of things that have been appreciated by the business community here, including President Lee coming to an annual reception of the American Chamber of Commerce and giving a speech on his vision of business in Korea.
이명박 대통령이 암참(AMCHAM · 주한 미국상공회의소)의 연례 리셉션을 찾아 주시는 등 이명박 대통령과 그의 정부가 여러 가지로 신경 써준 것에 대해 이곳 미국 경제 단체가 감사하게 생각하고 있습니다.

That meant a lot to the business community here.
그런 것들이 이곳 미국 실업계로써는 적지 않은 의미가 있죠.

They really appreciated it.
그들은 그런 부분에 대해 정말 감사하게 생각합니다.

They felt like it sent a very positive message throughout the bureaucracy that we were working together and that the role of foreign businesses, and American businesses, here play a positive role.
그런 부분이 양국이 협력하고 있으며 이곳에서 사업하는 외국계 업체나 미국계 업체의 역할에 대해 긍정적인 활동을 하고 있다는 긍정적인 메시지를 한국 관료 전체에 전하고 있다는 느낌을 줍니다.

So I think the atmosphere is actually very good."
그러니 기업 환경이 실제 아주 좋다고 생각한다.
</WRAP>


▼최근 아프가니스탄 추가 파병 문제로 한국 내에서 논란이 확산되고 있습니다.

"한국 정부가 최근 아프간 재건과 평화를 위해 민간인과 군병력을 추가 파견하겠다는 계획을 발표했는데,미국 정부는 한국의 결정을 환영합니다. 이미 40개국에 달하는 국가가 아프간 재건에 동참하고 있습니다. 아프가니스탄이 국제사회에서 중요한 문제가 되고 있는 만큼 미국의 동맹국으로서 한국이 민주적 절차에 따라 의사결정을 내리길 바랍니다. 논쟁(debate) 역시 민주적인 의사결정의 일부라고 생각합니다. 미국 내에서도 아프간 문제를 놓고 활발한 논쟁이 진행 중입니다. 미국 정부는 한국의 결정 과정을 관심있게 지켜볼 것입니다. "

▼한국이 글로벌 중심국가로 도약하기 위해선 어떤 노력이 필요한가요.

"한국은 이미 미국 등 글로벌 무대에서 긍정적 이미지로 스포트라이트를 받고 있습니다. 해외에선 한국의 경제적 번영과 민주주의적 성공을 잘 알고 있습니다. 한국의 경제 규모에 걸맞은 모범적 리더십을 보여주는 것이 중요합니다. G20 개최나 해외원조 등을 통해 국제 사회에 꾸준히 기여하는 것이 필요하다고 생각합니다. "

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1784.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 9, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Dong-a Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
Work on Four-River Restoration Project to Begin Tomorrow 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Labor Ministry to Blacklist Firms Paying Salaries 
to Full-Time Unionists 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Prime Minister and Five Other Heavyweights from Ruling GNP, 
Government, and Blue House Meet 
to Discuss "Sejong City Plan" 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
ROKG's Environmental Assessment for Four-River Project Criticized as 
"Inaccurate and Incomplete" 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
A bipartisan group of 88 U.S. congressmen sent a letter to President 
Obama on Nov. 6 urging him to expedite the process for the 
ratification of the KORUS FTA prior to his Nov. 18 visit to Seoul. 
(All) 
 
Lawrence Summers, Chairman of the U.S. National Economic Council, 
indicated during a Nov. 6 ROK-U.S. Business Council meeting in 
Washington that (the U.S.) is preparing to ratify the KORUS FTA. 
(JoongAng, Dong-a, Hankook) 
 
12 U.S. congressmen from Michigan, the heart of the U.S. automobile 
industry, meanwhile, called for a revision of the KORUS FTA on the 
same day. (Dong-a, Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------- 
 
A senior ROKG official told Korean correspondents in Washington on 
Nov. 6 that the U.S. will soon announce that Special Representative 
for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth will visit Pyongyang to meet 
with Kang Sok-ju, the North's First Vice Foreign Minister. 
(JoongAng) 
 
Jeffrey Bader, Senior Director for East Asian Affairs at the 
National Security Council, said during a Nov. 6 seminar in 
Washington that the U.S. is prepared for direct talks with North 
Korea. (Dong-a, Hankyoreh, Segye, Seoul, MBC) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
All ROK media on Saturday covered Nov. 5 press remarks by Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth, in which he 
said that the USG will "soon" decide on talks with North Korea and 
that if he does visit the North, it would most likely be "within 
weeks" after President Obama returns home from his Nov. 12-19 Asian 
trip. 
 
In a related development, right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo today quoted 
a senior ROKG official as telling ROK correspondents in Washington 
on Nov. 6 that the U.S. will soon announce that Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth will visit 
Pyongyang to meet with Kang Sok-ju, the North's First Vice Foreign 
Minister. 
 
Jeffrey Bader, Senior Director for East Asian Affairs at the 
 
SEOUL 00001784  002 OF 007 
 
 
National Security Council, was also widely quoted as saying during a 
Nov. 6 seminar in Washington that the U.S. is prepared for direct 
talks with North Korea and that it is discussing the timing and 
method of U.S.-North Korea talks with allies. 
 
-U.S.-Japan Alliance 
--------------------- 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized today: "Prime Minister 
Hatoyama does not deny the importance of Japan's alliance with the 
U.S.  He has repeatedly said that the U.S.-Japan alliance is the 
cornerstone of Japan's diplomacy.  However, it is clear that the 
U.S.-Japan alliance, which has been hailed as the most solid 
alliance in the world over the past 55 years, is going through 
transitional pains. ...  There is a new perception at play behind 
Hatoyama's new diplomacy that with the U.S.-focused diplomacy alone, 
Japan cannot find a new means of survival in the 21st political 
environment marked by 'China's rise.'" 
 
Berlin Wall - 20th Anniversary of Its Fall 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized: "The 20th anniversary of the 
fall of the Berlin Wall is an occasion for people of both Koreas to 
reflect on the stark reality of their national division. ... 
Continued personnel exchanges and cooperation between both Germanys 
laid the groundwork for reunification. ... Unfortunately, however, 
the road to Korean reunification is growing increasingly rockier, 
with North Korean leader Kim Jong-il seeking to transfer power to 
his son while confronting the international community with nuclear 
weapons.  The North's population of 24 million, brainwashed by their 
totalitarian government, is struggling with starvation.  In the 
early 1990s, the ROK's national income was six to eight times that 
of the North, but the gap is now 38 times. ...  Like in Germany, the 
Korean Peninsula could also see an unexpected reunification. ... 
Steady preparation is badly needed to minimize the costs and adverse 
effects of Korean reunification." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
ON CHANGING U.S. STRATEGY 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 7, 2009, Page 38) 
 
The United States has decided to keep the headquarters of its Eighth 
Army in the ROK, reversing plans to relocate it to Hawaii.  Next 
June, it will also form a new Korea Command, which will control the 
U.S. forces stationed here.  The move aims to minimize a gap in 
security on the peninsula when wartime operational control is 
transferred from the U.S. forces to South Korea in 2012.  The U.S. 
military wants to realign its units stationed here in accordance 
with its global military strategy.  And the new U.S. forces base in 
Pyeongtaek, Gyeonggi, scheduled to be complete in 2015, could serve 
as an overseas operational hub, a role currently assumed by the U.S. 
forces in Japan.  By giving strategic flexibility to the U.S. forces 
in South Korea, the Pyeongtaek base would become an advance base for 
the United States in Northeast Asia.  Given South Korea's 
geopolitical location neighboring North Korea and other regional 
powers, the new U.S. plans would be beneficial to our security.  But 
there are some issues to deal with as well.  The government must 
prepare measures in response to the restructuring of the U.S. 
military here. 
 
First, there is the fallout from the transfer of wartime operational 
command.  In emergencies, the ROK-U.S. Combined Forces Commander 
would control the U.S. forces here, American reinforcements from 
overseas and also the South Korean troops.  Up-to-date U.S. military 
intelligence from around the world and the country's combat 
capabilities would be put to efficient use in that case.  But by 
shifting the wartime command, South Korean forces would operate 
separately from their U.S. partners.  That runs the risk of 
compromising efficiency in the field.  The ROK-U.S. Mutual Defense 
Agreement stipulates automatic U.S. intervention in case South Korea 
comes under attack, but that is only on a theoretical basis.  The 
combined forces command is there to ensure such protection.  In 
other words, it has real impact in minimizing the possibility of 
 
SEOUL 00001784  003 OF 007 
 
 
North Korean provocations.  We need measures to prevent weakening of 
such effect.  The best solution would be to delay the transfer until 
at least the peninsula finds peace and stability. 
 
The forming of the new Korea Command would hinder our diplomatic 
activities in the future.  For instance, the presence of a U.S. 
advance base here might affect our relations with China or Russia. 
We can't avoid this possibility as long as we need U.S. troops in 
the nation, but still, the government needs to exercise flexibility 
to keep any negative side effects to a minimum. 
 
Finally, we must keep the latest move - with South Korea serving as 
the overseas base for the U.S. forces - from degenerating into an 
international controversy.  Some may charge that South Korea will 
depend entirely on the U.S. armed forces.  We must remember that 
western European nations and Japan have accepted a similar role for 
the sake of national security.  We must keep in mind that 
maintaining and strengthening our military alliance with the United 
States is the wisest option to satisfy our security needs. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
WHAT THE JAPAN-U.S. RIFT MEANS FOR NORTHEAST ASIA 
(Chosun Ilbo, November 9, 2009, Page 35) 
 
Tension between Washington and Tokyo is growing ahead of U.S. 
President Barack Obama's visit to Japan this Saturday and Sunday. 
The reason is Japanese Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama's repeated 
comments since his inauguration in September that Japan has relied 
too much on the U.S. and will seek a more equal relationship. 
Hatoyama told lawmakers on Oct. 29 a "comprehensive review" is 
needed in U.S.-Japan relations. 
 
Hatoyama's cabinet wants to revise a 2006 agreement over the 
relocation of the Futenma air base in Okinawa.  Some lawmakers in 
the ruling Democratic Party want the air base out of Japan 
altogether.  That is threatening a U.S. strategy to reorganize its 
troop presence in Asia. 
 
The U.S. and Japan even canceled a foreign ministerial meeting 
planned in Washington.  Some experts are saying the rift is too deep 
to patch up in a hurry.  The U.S. government and media have said 
recently that Japan is not what it used to be, criticizing it for 
replacing China as Washington's "headache."  The U.S. has considered 
its ties with Tokyo the cornerstone of its diplomatic strategy in 
Asia, which is why it is so sensitive. 
 
But Hatoyama is showing no signs of backing down, saying he is 
against the U.S. attempts to solve problems in Afghanistan by 
military means.  All the while, Hatoyama is looking for closer Asian 
integration, proposing an East Asian Community. 
 
Prime Minister Hatoyama does not deny the importance of Japan's 
alliance with the U.S.  He has repeatedly said that the U.S.-Japan 
alliance is the cornerstone of Japan's diplomacy.  However, it is 
clear that the U.S.-Japan alliance, which has been hailed as the 
most solid alliance in the world over the past 55 years, is going 
through transitional pains.  These changes cannot be seen solely as 
the result of Hatoyama's decisions.  There is a new perception at 
play behind Hatoyama's new diplomacy that with the U.S.-focused 
diplomacy alone, Japan cannot find a new means of survival in the 
21st political environment marked by "China's rise." 
 
In August, Hatoyama claimed that the era of U.S.-led globalization 
is coming to an end and the world is heading toward a multipolar 
order.  Washington is bogged down in two wars, and the global 
financial crisis is testing its resources.  Even under the Liberal 
Democrats, Japanese officials worried whether Washington's 
diplomatic policies favored Tokyo or Beijing.  But Japanese 
officials were shocked to see the Obama Administration raise its 
relationship with China to a "strategic partnership."  Until then, 
Washington had viewed China as both a cooperative partner and a 
 
SEOUL 00001784  004 OF 007 
 
 
country to be wary of.  The reason the Hatoyama Administration is 
seeking to change Japan's 100-year-old diplomatic style by focusing 
more on Asia is not just due to the threat to Washington's dominance 
but to the need to adopt quickly to the shift in policies by the 
Obama Administration. 
 
It remains to be seen how Hatoyama's new foreign policy will shape 
up and whether it proves no more than a temporary escape from 
traditional policies.  But it is clear that diplomacy in Asia, where 
the interests of South Korea, China and Japan are closely 
intertwined, will change.  South Korea faces the task of preparing 
for eventual reunification with North Korea and must fine-tune its 
national strategy by accurately forecasting the changes from U.S.'s 
decline and China's rise.  The sounds of discord between Washington 
and Tokyo should be taken as a wake-up call for South Korea in 
shaping its national strategy in the increasingly fluid and complex 
diplomatic landscape of Northeast Asia. 
 
 (This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY APPROVES TRADE PACT WITH INDIA; NOW IT IS THE 
KORUS FTA'S TURN 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 9, 2009, page 33) 
 
The National Assembly yesterday ratified a Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with India virtually unanimously (192 
in favor with 5 abstentions),  opening the door to the Indian market 
with its 1.2 billion population starting early next year.  The CEPA 
is as effective as a free trade agreement (FTA).  If the National 
Assembly had failed to ratify the CEPA this time, we would have had 
to wait another year to ratify the trade deal.  Even though the 
ruling and opposition parties have been mired in political 
bickering, lawmakers ratified the CEPA by an overwhelming vote, 
showing that they can cooperate on an issue of vital national 
interest.  It is praiseworthy that the National Assembly swiftly 
ratified the CEPA before the deadline. 
 
With the CEPA coming into effect next year, the ROK will be able to 
gain an upper hand in the Indian market, which has the world's 
fourth largest consumption power, over other competitors.  This is 
because the ROK is the first country, among India's major 
competitors, to open the door to free trade with India.  Now 
attention is drawn to when the already-signed KORUS and ROK-EU FTAs 
will be ratified.  Since the recently concluded FTA with the EU does 
not face much opposition in the ROK, it does not seem that it will 
be difficult to get legislative approval (to ratify) the agreement. 
However, ratification of the KORUS FTA, which was signed earlier 
than the ROK-EU FTA, is facing difficulty both in the ROK and the 
U.S. 
 
The atmosphere in the U.S. is, however, turning favorable after 88 
Congressmen sent a letter to President Barack Obama urging him to 
ratify the pact.  White House Economic Advisor Lawrence Summers also 
recently said, at the Korea-U.S. Economic Conference in Washington, 
"The USG is preparing itself for the FTA's ratification," implying 
that there was some progress in the ratification process.  The 
problem is that since the FTA bill passed the ROK National Assembly 
Standing Committee this past April, the bill has not even been laid 
before the plenary session of the National Assembly for six months. 
The ruling and opposition parties approved the trade deal with India 
under the spirit of "giving top priority to the national interest." 
We hope that they will exercise the same spirit in persuading the 
U.S. to ratify the ROK-U.S. FTA.  That is what a hard-working 
National Assembly should do. 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
U.S. AMBASSADOR STEPHENS SAYS THAT ROK HAS MADE IMPRESSIVE 
IMPROVEMENT IN ITS BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT... G20 WILL SERVE AS 
OPPORTUNITY FOR ROK TO BECOME GLOBAL HUB 
 
SEOUL 00001784  005 OF 007 
 
 
(Korea Economic Daily, November 9, 2009, page 33) 
 
U.S. Ambassador to the ROK Stephens calls herself an "optimist." 
When I entered the U.S. Embassy's office for interview, an Indian 
ink painting, which is hung in the center of the wall, came into my 
sight first.  She said with a beaming smile, "When I visited Yesan 
Middle school after thirty years, my students gave this (to me) as a 
gift to celebrate my (appointment as Ambassador.)  This painting is 
my hometown in my heart." 
 
When asked what she thinks about some opinions that the ROK's 
cultural standards have not kept up with its economic growth, 
Stephens said that the ROK's cultural standards were high in the 
1970s.  These favorable remarks show her deep love for Korea as the 
first U.S. Ambassador to the ROK who has Korean name, Shim 
Eun-kyong. 
 
Q.  How was the first year as U.S. Ambassador to the ROK? 
 
"When I first arrived here, I think (it was) a day or so after 
Lehman Brothers collapsed.  When I arrived, I had the economic 
situation very much on my mind.  I was impressed by the spirit of 
determination I saw in Korea to approach the crisis in a very 
resolute fashion.  (When I first came to Korea in the 1970s,) I 
certainly knew that Korea was changing very rapidly.  Among Korean 
people, there was even at that time a very deep desire for a modern 
democratic country.  Korea, I see today, exceeds in its economic 
vibrancy and the health of its democracy, it exceeds even what were 
my high expectations based upon two years of living in Korea in the 
1070s.  I think that Korea in a much closer time than thirty years 
but in the coming years will play increasingly an important role not 
only in the region but also on the world stage. Chairing of the G20 
next year is one early sign of that." 
 
Q. Is it true that you decided to become a diplomat when you worked 
as a peace corps volunteer? 
 
"I came to Korea in 1975 and (I had just) come out of the 
university.  I knew many young men who had been faced with the 
question of going to Vietnam to fight in a war, which was dividing 
our society.  That was the context.  I came to Korea and, as I lived 
in Yesan, I thought that East Asia is very important to the U.S. now 
and (will be) even more so in the future.   I saw what was happening 
in Korea, the sense of great potential going forward.  It is even 
more difficult to try to understand a country that has a very 
different history and culture than your own.  At that time, in 
Korean schools, especially in the boys' schools with very large 
classes of 70 students, they had to maintain order.  Sometimes, some 
teachers were very severe in the way they punished the boys. 
Sometimes it was actually rather shocking (to see) a young student 
being punished physically, very severely.  What do you do about it? 
Do you try to persuade the teacher that there is a better way?  Do 
you leave the (teacher's) room?  There is no one answer.  You have 
to think about the situation itself and what you want to achieve and 
then adjust your approach.  I think that is what diplomacy is about 
too." 
 
Q. Do you think the Lee Myung-bak Government has a good relationship 
with the Obama Administration? 
 
"Now we have two presidents, President Lee and President Obama, who 
already have established a very strong working and personal 
relationship.  President Obama is very much looking forward to an 
opportunity to visit Korea.  This is his first visit to Korea as far 
as I know.  He has a great interest in Korea and great respect for 
Korea and enthusiasm for what Korea represents in the world and what 
it has accomplished.  (U.S. government officials) are having 
in-depth discussions with President Lee Myung-bak's staff on the 
range of subjects (to be discussed during the summit.) We don't have 
an agreed agenda. You can image what's on it.  We have a lot of 
things we are working on together including economic issues  in 
multilateral forum like the G20,  very close coordination on next 
steps related to North Korea, and a range of other bilateral issues 
in which we want to cooperate more closely." 
 
SEOUL 00001784  006 OF 007 
 
 
 
Q. There has been little progress on the KORUS FTA even though it 
has been two years since the ROK and the U.S. signed the trade deal. 
 Can we expect surprising news from President Obama during his visit 
to the ROK? 
 
"This is the agreement we all know that was agreed to and signed by 
our two governments over two years ago now.  Since then, we had 
elections in both countries with a change of parties in power, we 
had an economic recession of historic dimensions, and we had 
historic turmoil in the automobile sector, particularly in the U.S. 
So, given all that, over the last two years or so, maybe it was not 
surprising that we are not a little further along in the FTA 
ratification process.  Since January with the Obama Administration 
coming into office, our new U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk has 
met with his counterpart Ambassador Kim.  They had good discussions. 
 In September I travelled around the U.S. with Ambassador Han 
Duck-soo and talked about our overall relationship.  The U.S. Trade 
Representative earlier this autumn asked for comments from all 
stakeholders on the FTA.   My sense is that the (comments) were 
overwhelmingly in favor of the FTA.  It is no s-e-c-r-e-t that U.S. 
auto companies have been very hard hit over the last year in this 
recession.  Korean auto companies have done relatively better.  We 
are pleased to see that Korean automakers are making an investment 
in the U.S.  We are committed to reengaging on this and finding the 
right way forward.  Both of our presidents have been very clear that 
this is an FTA that has the potential for very significant 
benefits." 
 
Q. Does the U.S. have any post-Kim Jong-il contingency plan or any 
plan for a possible collapse of the North Korean regime? 
 
"In June, our two Presidents agreed, and then put in our Joint 
Vision Statement, our shared and deep desire to see reconciliation, 
peaceful reunification of the Korean Peninsula in a manner 
consistent with democracy and a free market.  As an ally with the 
ROK, we have responsibility to be prepared for any contingency 
(including the death of North Korean leader Kim Jong-il).  But, in 
terms of what we do as diplomats, we deal with the situation we have 
now, we deal with North Korea as it is now.  That's why we are 
trying to be very clear that there is a path that the leadership in 
North Korea can take, which is a diplomatic path of returning to a 
process of denuclearization, returning to a process of implementing 
its commitments made (in the September 19, 2005 Joint Statement and 
the February 13, 2007 agreement.)   So, we are trying, together with 
Seoul and the other partners in the Six-Party Talks, to make very 
clear to the current leadership in Pyongyang that we want to see 
progress now.   We are not waiting for something else to happen. 
We think it's very important that the leadership in North Korea now 
make that choice towards a better future for its people and for its 
country." 
 
Q. For some time, there was a perception among foreign firms that 
Korea is a country that is really difficult to do business in.  Do 
you see any improvement or progress made since the inauguration of 
the Lee Myung-bak Administration? 
 
"In the 1980s in Busan, where I dealt with American businesses quite 
a bit, I heard this kind of complaint quite a bit, that it was 
difficult to deal with some of the Korean bureaucracies, rules were 
unclear, and  there was a lot of concern about possible unfavorable 
treatment to foreign businesses.  One heard many complaints like 
this from foreign businesses, including American businesses.  There 
was (also) concern about the labor scene.  I have been very 
impressed since I came back last year... by how much that has 
changed.  So I think, in some way, that the perception that you just 
described is still out there, that in some quarters (doing business 
in Korea) is very tough.  But, in fact, if you talk to the companies 
who are actually doing business here I don't hear that complaint. 
So I think the situation has actually gotten steadily better over 
the years from the point of view of the international business 
environment.  Certainly President Lee Myung-bak and his 
administration have done a number of things that have been 
appreciated by the business community here, including President Lee 
 
SEOUL 00001784  007 OF 007 
 
 
coming to an annual reception of the American Chamber of Commerce 
and giving a speech on his vision of business in Korea.  That meant 
a lot to the business community here.  They really appreciated it. 
They felt like it sent a very positive message throughout the 
bureaucracy that we were working together and that the role of 
foreign businesses, and American businesses, here play a positive 
role.  So I think the atmosphere is actually very good." 
 
Q. There is a controversial issue about the ROKG resending its 
troops to Afghanistan. 
 
"The government of the Republic of Korea, as I understand it, 
announced that it intends to prepare to send an increased number of 
both civilians and troops to Afghanistan to assist the people of 
Afghanistan and their efforts at stability and reconstruction.  Many 
countries, I think about 40 countries, are participating in that 
effort.  Speaking for the United States, we welcome Korea's 
announcement that it intends to make an increased contribution.  In 
terms of the political process here that underpins that decision, 
that is the democratic process of the Republic of Korea.   Debate is 
part of the process in any democratic society.  Certainly, within 
the United States, the way forward in Afghanistan is also something 
that is being debated.  We certainly will follow this with interest 
as the Korean government moves forward with this plan." 
 
Q. What are the areas you think that Korea should work more to 
become a truly global leader? 
 
 "My own sense is that Korea's image in the world is quite strong 
and has grown even more positive.  People, especially in the U.S., 
know that Korea's economic success and its democratic success are 
growing daily.  I think it is important that Korea is participating 
more actively in the international community and playing more of a 
leadership role that reflects its economic weight such as chairing 
the G20 ." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>