^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1620  |  2009-10-15  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 14일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001620

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.redian.org/archive/26496|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 14일]]
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/09 13:34//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보, 세계일보, 모든 텔레비전
임진강 수해방지 오늘 南北 회담; 北, 사과 여부 '주목' 

중앙일보
세종대왕함 무기고 절반 비었다

동아일보
"대화가 필요해" 유연해진 南

한국일보
南北 오랜만에 '소통 기류' 완연

한겨레 신문
세종시 대신 U시티·그린시티 /대학·기업·연구시설 이전 포함

서울신문
北의 두얼굴…미사일 발사 하루뒤 오늘 임진강 회담 수용

===== 국내 동향 =====

이번 주 수해 방지와 인도적 현안(이산가족)에 관한 남북 회담을 열자는 남측의 제한을 북한이 수용하였다고 통일부는 전했다. 북한의 최신 화해 제스처는 동해 상으로 단거리 미사일 5개를 발사한 지 하루 만에 나왔다. (전체)

한국군은 북한이 서해 해상에 항해금지 구역을 선포한 이후 경계 태세에 돌입했다고 한국 정부 소식통은 전했다. (조선, 동아, 세계, 서울)

한국 정부는 13일 북한의 12일 단거리미사일 발사에 대한 공식 대응을 자제하였다. 이런 행보는 오늘과 내일 예정된 북한과의 실무회담을 의식한 듯이 보인다. (동아, 서울)

미국 항공우주국(NASA)의 최고 책임자인 찰스 볼든 국장은 대전에서 열리고 있는 국제우주대회에 참석해 달 탐사, 인공위성, 항공 등 분야에서 한국과의 미래 협력이 가능할 것이라고 말했다. (조선, [[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/society/society_general/381681.html|한겨레]], 세계)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

힐러리 클린턴 국무부 장관은 러시아에서 열린 10월 13일 기자회견에서 “현 시점에서 대북제재를 완화하거나 완화를 제의할 의향이 전혀 없다”고 말했다. (조선, 모든 텔레비전)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

보수 조선일보와 모든 텔레비전 방송국은 러시아를 방문 중인 힐러리 클린턴의 10월 13일 회견 발언을 보도하였다. 그녀의 발언 내용: “현 시점에서 대북제재를 완화하거나 완화를 제의할 의향이 전혀 없다.”

북한이 13일 수해 방지와 인도적 현안(이산가족)에 관한 남북 회담을 열자는 남측의 제안을 수용했다는 소식이 큰 주목을 받았다. 대다수 언론은 북한의 이번 화해 제스쳐는 동해상에 단거리미사일 5개를 발사한 지 하루 만이라고 언급하고 미사일 발사 시험과 동시에 협상을 타진하는 이중적인 북한의 태도를 비판하였다.

대다수 언론은 북한이 서해 해상에 항해금지 구역을 선포한 이후 한국군이 경계 태세에 돌입했다고 역시 보도했다. 한국 정부 소식통의 발언 내용: "아직 미사일 실험을 준비하는 구체적인 징후는 없지만, 서해상을 예의 주시하고 있다."((역주: 검색해 보았지만, 이런 내용의 발언 발견하지 못함.))

10월 12일 북한의 미사일 발사에 대한 한국 정부의 저자세 대응도 역시 언론의 큰 관심을 받았다. 외교통상부 당국자는 “북한이 단거리미사일 5발을 발사한 것은 유엔 안전보장이사회 결의 1874호를 위반한 것”이라면서도 “논평 등을 통해 공식적으로 대응할 계획은 없다”고 밝혔다.

대다수 신문은 한국 정부의 이런 움직임은 북한이 동해상에 단거리 1발과 중거리 미사일 6개를 발산한 이후 반응과는 확연히 대조를 이룬다며 오늘과 내일 예정된 북한과의 실무회담을 의식한 듯이 보인다고 언급했다.

보수 조선일보 사설: "유엔 제재는 중국이 대규모 대북 지원에 나서면서 효과가 반감된 데 이어 이번에 북한이 다시 보란듯이 유엔 결의를 무시함으로써 사실상 유명무실해져 버린 인상이다. 때를 맞춘 듯 우리 정부도 북한에 쌀 1만~3만t의 인도적 지원을 검토한다고 했으니 …이렇게 대화가 시작되기도 전에 제재부터 흐지부지해 북핵 대화의 바람을 빼 버려서는 북핵 폐기라는 목적지까지 다다를 수가 없다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://www.donga.com/fbin/output?n=200910140137|[횡설수설/박영균]CO₂와 GDP]]**(동아일보, 2009년 10월 14일, 38면)

박영균 논설위원 

2일 미국 시애틀의 그레그 니켈스 시장은 “미국 내 1000개 도시의 시장들이 교토 기후변화협약에 따라 온실가스를 줄이기로 서명했다”고 발표했다. 시장들은 연방정부와 주정부에 2012년 온실가스 배출량을 1990년 기준으로 7% 감축하도록 촉구하기도 했다. 실제로 시애틀은 2005년 배출량을 1990년 수준에 비해 8%, 로스앤젤레스는 7% 줄였다. 미국은 온실가스 감축에 미온적이라는 공격을 받아왔지만 주정부의 자발적인 감축만으로도 유럽연합(EU)이나 일본 못지않게 온실가스를 줄였다. 

온실가스 감축 압력을 받고 있는 경제협력개발기구(OECD) 회원국 중에서 한국의 이산화탄소(CO₂) 배출 증가율이 가장 높다는 조사 결과가 나왔다. 국제에너지기구(IEA) 보고서는 2007년 한국의 CO₂ 배출량이 1990년에 비해 113% 증가했다고 밝혔다. 총배출량에서도 한국은 2006년에 이어 세계 9위를 기록했다. 한국보다 많은 나라는 1위 중국, 2위 미국에 이어 러시아 인도 일본 독일 캐나다 영국 등이다.

경제성장으로 국내총생산(GDP)이 커지면 CO₂ 배출이 늘어나는 게 정상이다. ‘세계의 공장’인 중국이 CO₂ 배출량 세계 1위를 차지하고 러시아 인도 등 신흥국가들의 배출 순위가 높아진 것도 경제성장 때문이다. 그러나 우리나라는 명목 GDP가 2003년 세계 11위였다가 인도 브라질 러시아 호주 등에 차례로 밀려 2007년에는 세계 15위로 떨어졌는데도 CO₂ 배출 순위는 별로 바뀌지 않았다. CO₂ 배출이 많은 제조업 비중이 큰 탓이다.

올해 말 덴마크 코펜하겐에서 열리는 유엔 기후변화협약 총회에서는 2013년 이후 온실가스 감축 문제를 논의한다. 한국은 머지않아 의무감축국가로 지정될 가능성이 높다. 지난달 유엔본부에서 열린 기후변화회의에서 미국 중국 인도 등 핵심 국가의 정상들이 온실가스 감축 의지를 밝혔다. EU와 일본은 1990년 대비 각각 20%와 25%, 미국은 2005년 대비 17%의 감축 목표를 제시했다. 한국도 2005년 대비 8% 증가, 동결, 4% 감축 등 3개안을 제시하고 있다. 2013년이 얼마 남지 않았다. CO₂를 덜 내보내는 성장, 바로 녹색성장이 발등의 불이 됐다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://english.hani.co.kr/arti/opinion/editorial/381734.html|[사설]잇따른 남북대화, 대북정책 전환의 계기 돼야]]**(한겨레신문, 2009년 10월 14일, 35면)

남북 당국이 이번주 잇따라 만난다. 남북은 14일과 16일, 개성에서 각각 임진강 수해 방지를 위한 실무회담과 적십자 실무접촉을 열기로 합의했다. 적십자회담을 제외하고, 남북 당국자가 직접 만나는 것은 지난 7월 초 제3차 개성공단 실무회담 이후 3개월여 만이다. 이산가족 상봉과 대북 인도지원 등을 논의할 적십자 실무접촉도, 외양은 민간 회담이지만 사실상 당국간 접촉이라고 해도 무방하다. 북-미, 북-중 관계가 남북관계보다 앞서 나가는 것 아니냐는 우려 속에서 나온 오랜만의 밝은 소식이다.

북쪽은 이번에 남쪽의 회담 제안을 날짜 변경 없이 즉각 받아들였다. 지난 8월 김대중 전 대통령 조문 특사 방문 이래, 한결같이 유지되고 있는 남북관계 개선에 대한 북쪽의 적극적인 의지를 다시금 엿보게 하는 대목이다. 원자바오 중국 총리가 지난 10일 한-중-일 정상회의에서 “방북에서 얻은 가장 큰 느낌”이라며 전한 북쪽의 남북관계 개선 의지와도 아귀가 맞는다.

반면, 남쪽은 먼저 대화 제의를 하긴 했지만 여전히 소극적인 태도다. 시기만 해도 그렇다. ‘임진강 참사’ 이후 재발 방지를 위한 남북회담의 필요성이 한창 제기됐을 때는 잠자코 있다가, 중국의 강력한 대북 대화 권유를 받고서야 마지못해 움직임에 나선 느낌을 지울 수 없다. 대화의 격과 수위도, 북한·미국·중국이 큰 틀에서 대화를 통한 북한 핵 문제의 해결 쪽으로 가닥을 잡고 있는 데 견줘 너무 실무적이고 한가해 보인다.

임진강 실무회담과 적십자 실무접촉에서도 해야 할 일은 있다. 임진강 참사에 대한 책임을 따지고, 재발 방지 방안을 마련하는 것은 필요하다. 또 적십자회담에서 살 날이 얼마 남지 않은 이산가족을 상시로 만날 수 있게 하고, 굶주림에 고통받는 북쪽 주민에게 식량을 지원하는 일도 중요하다. 북쪽도 요구만 하지 말고, 해명할 것을 해명하고 유감을 표시할 것은 해야 한다.

하지만 거기에 그쳐선 안 된다. 남북관계가 정체해 있는 동안, 북한과 중국이 정치·경제적으로 급속히 가까워지고 있다. 우리가 대북 제재에만 매달리는 사이에 한반도 문제에 대한 우리의 목소리는 약해지고 있다. 큰 위기이다. 현실적으로 남북관계의 획기적인 개선 없이 우리가 설 자리를 찾기 어렵다. 

정부는 이번 연쇄 대화를 대북정책 대전환의 계기로 삼기 바란다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/13/2009101301776.html|대북 제재 고삐 놓쳐 북에 다시 주도권 갖다 바치나]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 14일, 39면)

북한은 12일 동해안에서 사정거리 120여㎞의 단거리 지대지(地對地) 미사일 5발을 발사했다. 이 미사일은 남한에 가장 위협적인 북한 무기 중 하나다. 북은 서해안의 평안남도 앞바다에도 항해금지구역을 선포했다. 동해에 이어 서해에서도 조만간 미사일을 발사할 수 있다는 이야기다.

북한은 올 4월부터 7월 초까지 모두 18발의 미사일을 쐈고, 한 차례의 핵실험을 했다. 그 이후 북한은 석달여 동안 핵과 미사일 활동을 자제하는 듯한 모습을 보였다. 이달 초 북한을 방문했던 원자바오 중국 총리는 이명박 대통령과 하토야마 일본 총리에게 "지금이 북한과 대화할 때"라고 했다. 북한은 원 총리의 이 말이 미처 허공에서 사라지기도 전에 또 한번 미사일을 발사했다.

북한의 이번 미사일 발사는 지난 7월의 유엔 안보리 제재 결의 1874호 위반이다. 유엔 제재는 중국이 대규모 대북 지원에 나서면서 효과가 반감된 데 이어 이번에 북한이 다시 보란듯이 유엔 결의를 무시함으로써 사실상 유명무실해져 버린 인상이다. 때를 맞춘 듯 우리 정부도 북한에 쌀 1만~3만t의 인도적 지원을 검토한다고 했으니 이제 북한이 유엔 제재를 또 위반했다고 추가 제재를 들먹일 나라도 없어진 셈이다.

정부는 이번 북한의 미사일 발사에 대해 "성능 개량을 위한 실험일 가능성이 높다"고 했다. 북한이 한·미와 국제사회를 압박하는 무력시위 차원에서 벌였던 올 상반기의 핵과 미사일 도발과는 달리 정치적 의미는 크지 않다는 이야기다. 미국도 애써 북한의 미사일 발사를 외면하고 있다. 북한 미사일 발사의 파장을 최소화하고 북한과 대화 분위기를 이어가려는 듯하다.

전쟁을 벌이는 교전국(交戰國)들도 대화는 한다. 문제는 대화의 목적이다. 제재와 대화는 북핵 폐기를 위한 양면(兩面) 전술이다. 제재 일방으로 나가도 실효(實效)를 거두기 어렵고, 대화에만 매달려도 핵 터널의 끝이 보이지 않는다. 제재와 대화가 손을 맞잡고 밀고 나가야 한다는 것이 지금까지 대북 협상의 교훈이었다.

이렇게 대화가 시작되기도 전에 제재부터 흐지부지해 북핵 대화의 바람을 빼 버려서는 북핵 폐기라는 목적지까지 다다를 수가 없다. 한·미·중·일·러 5자(者)가 서로 조율된 큰 그림 없이 저마다 다른 속셈으로 개별적으로 대북 대화를 추진하거나 제재를 무력화하는 조치에 가담하는 등 사분오열된 탓에 일이 이 지경에 이르렀다.

북한은 미사일을 쏜 다음날 아무 일도 없는 듯이 우리측이 전날 제안한 임진강 수해방지 실무회담과 이산가족 상봉 문제를 다루기 위한 남북 적십자 실무접촉을 갖는 데 선뜻 응하고 나섰다. 북한에 다시 상황 주도권을 갖다 바친 꼴이다. 

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://news.joins.com/article/3822685|[사설] 대화 나서며 미사일 쏘는 북한의 이중 플레이]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 14일, 46면)

오늘부터 임진강 수해 방지를 논의하는 남북대화가 열린다. 정부가 이틀 전 제안한 데 대해 북한이 하루 만에 동의해 이뤄졌다. 실무급이지만 2년 가까이 단절됐던 남북 당국 간 대화가 사실상 재개되는 것이어서 의미가 작지 않다. 그러나 북한은 동시에 우리가 대화 제의를 한 당일 동해상으로 단거리 미사일 5기를 발사했다. 모든 탄도미사일 발사를 금지한 유엔 안전보장이사회의 결의를 무시한 행동이다. 핵 문제 해결을 위해 ‘압박과 대화’를 내세우는 한·미·일의 투 트랙 정책에 대응해 북한이 나름대로 복합적인 대응에 나선 모양새다.

앞으로 열릴 북·미 대화에 대비해 여러 복선을 깔고 움직이는 것으로 추정된다. 북한의 의도를 정확히 파악해 효과적으로 대응할 필요성이 커지고 있다.

남북대화에 응하고 나선 북한의 의도는 남북 간 긴장완화 없이는 북·미 간 대화가 원활하게 추진되기 어렵다는 판단에 따른 것으로 추정된다. 지난달 황강댐 무단방류에 대한 사과와 재발방지 대책 등을 의제로 삼은 우리 측 대화 제의에 응한 점이 그런 추정을 뒷받침한다. 예전 같으면 남북관계가 해빙무드일 때조차 쉽사리 응하지 않았을 사안이기 때문이다. 이산가족 문제 등을 논의하자는 적십자회담 개최에 동의한 것도 비슷한 맥락이다. 의도가 어떻든 우리가 지정한 의제를 다루는 데 동의한 것은 일단 긍정적인 측면이 있다. 이번 일을 계기로 당국 간 대화가 계속 이어져 금강산 관광객 피격 사망 사건 등 남북 간 현안의 해결에 진전이 있기를 기대한다. 나아가 핵 문제 해결 방안도 남북대화에서 다뤄져야 한다는 점을 북한에 촉구한다.

미사일 발사 의도는 훨씬 복합적이다. 이번에 발사한 KN-O2 미사일은 최신 기종이다. 수도권은 물론 평택의 2함대 사령부, 건설 중인 평택 미군기지까지 사거리가 미칠 것으로 분석된다. 북한은 이런 최신 미사일 성능을 과시함으로써 군사적으로 대남·대미 압박을 시도한 것으로 읽힌다. 이동식 발사대와 고체 연료를 사용한 미사일로 기동성이 뛰어나기 때문에 한·미연합군의 대처가 쉽지 않음을 증명하려는 것이다. 북한의 의도는 군사적인 것에 그치지 않는다. 앞으로 있을 북·미 대화에서 협상 주도권을 장악하려는 정치적 의도도 있어 보인다. 북한 핵 포기에 초점을 맞추는 미국에 맞서 자기 주장을 강력히 제기하려는 것이다. 바로 미국의 ‘대북한 적대시 정책 전환’이다. 북한이 말하는 ‘적대시 정책’은 한·미 동맹을 직접 겨냥하고 있다. 북한의 핵 포기와 핵우산을 포함한 미국의 대(對)한국 방위공약의 폐기, 나아가 주한미군 철수를 맞바꾸자고 할 것으로 보인다. 우리가 가장 경계해야 할 대목이다.

북한이 어떤 의도를 가졌든 우리는 우리 나름의 목적과 계획을 가지고 상황을 장악해야 한다. 남북 관계, 북·중 관계, 한·미 관계, 북·미 대화 등 여러 변수들을 고려해 우리의 국익을 최대한 관철할 수 있는 방안을 마련해야 한다. 그러자면 급변하는 상황에 휘둘리지 않고 냉철하고 신중한 판단을 토대로 전략적으로 기민하게 대처할 수 있어야 한다. 정부의 외교안보 능력이 시험대에 올랐다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://www.koreadaily.com/news/read.asp?art_id=925460|'오바마 효과' 지구촌 화해의 바람]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 14일, 14면)

남정호 기자

'벽을 뛰어넘은 세상' 향한 행보 

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 노벨 평화상을 받자 찬반 논란이 있지만 지구촌 곳곳에서 '화해의 훈풍'이 불기 시작한 것은 사실이다. 미국 일방주의에서 탈피 군사력과 외교적 해결 방식을 적절히 섞어 사용하자는 오바마식 '스마트 파워(Smart Power)' 정책이 지구촌 분위기를 바꿔놓고 있는 것이다. 오바마가 자신의 저서 『담대한 희망 (The Audacity of Hope)』에서 밝힌 '벽을 뛰어넘은 세상(The World Beyond Our Border)'을 향해 달려온 결과다.

오바마는 취임 후 역대 미 대통령보다 많은 곳을 돌아다녔다. 이에 따라 지구촌 곳곳에서 인종 이념 파워 투쟁의 벽을 넘어 대화로 해결하려는 물결이 일면서 '세계 관계 지도'가 달라지고 있다.

◇해결 실마리 찾은 분쟁지역=조지 W 부시 전 대통령 시절의 강경 압박 정책으로 악화일로를 걷던 북한.이란의 핵확산 문제부터 상황이 달라졌다. 북핵 사태는 북.미 양자협상 개시란 꼬리표가 붙긴 했지만 일단 대화 국면으로 접어들었다. 이란도 우라늄 농축 시설에 대한 국제사찰을 수용하겠다고 나섰다. 러시아와 핵무기 감축에 합의했다는 것도 중대한 진전이다. 오바마 주도로 미국과 러시아는 양국의 최대 핵탄두 보유 규모를 현재 6000개에서 1500~1750개로 줄이기로 합의했다. 더불어 최근까지도 미국의 적대국으로 분류되던 쿠바.베네수엘라 등과 관계 개선도 진행되고 있다. 오바마는 '적과의 대화'를 강조해온 터라 이들 국가와의 관계에도 해빙무드가 감돌고 있다. 

◇'스마트 파워' 외교=오바마가 취임 8개월 만에 적지 않은 성과를 낸 비결은 그의 외교 철학과 직결돼 있다는 게 일반적인 평가다. 그는 무엇보다 군사력에 기초한 미국의 일방주의에 반대한다. 각국과 의견 수렴을 통해 전 세계적인 공감대를 형성한 후 공동 대응에 나서야 한다는 것이다. 이 같은 신념은 그의 저서 『담대한 희망』에 잘 나타나 있다. 그는 이 책에서 "테러에 맞서 자위권을 발동할 경우를 빼고는 다자주의에 입각해 행동하는 것이 항상 미국의 전략적 이익에 부합한다"고 주장했다. 그래서 군사력과 외교적 협상을 적절히 섞어서 사용하는 '스마트 파워' 외교를 선호한다.

◇치솟는 미국의 신뢰도=9.11 테러에 이은 아프간.이라크전 발발 이후 국제사회에서 추락했던 대미 선호도는 오바마 취임 이후 눈에 띄게 좋아졌다. 최초의 흑인 대통령인 오바마 개인에 대한 인기와 맞물려 미국의 태도 변화는 특히 유럽에서 큰 호응을 얻었다. 미국 퓨연구소 조사에 따르면 2008년 31%에 불과했던 독일 내 미국에 대한 호감 정서는 올해 64%로 뛰었다. 같은 기간 스페인에선 33%에서 58%로 프랑스에선 42%에서 75%로 좋아졌다. 이집트.요르단 등 중동 국가에서도 비슷한 반응이었다. 

◇앞으로의 과제=오바마의 발목을 잡는 난제가 없는 건 아니다. 무엇보다 이라크전과 더불어 아프간 전쟁이 가장 큰 고민거리다. 오바마는 대선 때 철군 공약을 내세웠다. 그러나 자칫 병력을 뺐다간 두 분쟁 모두 '실패한 전쟁'으로 전락하게 된다는 점에서 오바마는 고심하고 있다. 따라서 여전히 많은 희생자를 내고 있는 아프간.이라크전을 어떻게 수습할지가 오바마 외교의 성패를 가늠할 잣대가 될 전망이다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 ======
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1620.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001620 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 14, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, All TVs 
Koreas to Hold Talks on Flood Prevention Today 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
ROK Military Poorly-Equipped Due to Lack of Money 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
ROKG Stays Cool amid Latest N. Korea Missile Launches 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
"Dialogue Mood" Sets in between Two Koreas 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Ruling Camp Considers Revising Sejong City Project to Make Sejong a 
City Equipped with Green Growth Industries, Educational and Research 
Facilities 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
"Two-Faced N. Korea:" N. Korea Accepts Seoul's Proposal 
for Talks One Day after Test-firing Missiles 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to the Unification Ministry, North Korea has accepted 
Seoul's proposal for inter-Korean talks this week over flood 
prevention and humanitarian issues. The North's latest conciliatory 
gesture comes one day after it test-fired five short-range missiles 
off its east coast. (All) 
 
According to an ROKG source, the ROK military is on the alert for 
more North Korean short-range missile tests after the North declared 
a navigation ban also in the West Sea. (Chosun, Dong-a, Segye, 
Seoul) 
 
The ROKG yesterday refrained from making an official response to 
North Korea's Oct. 12 missile launches. This move seems to have come 
out of consideration of the upcoming working-level talks with North 
Korea slated for today and tomorrow. (Dong-a, Seoul) 
 
U.S. NASA Chief Charles Bolden, Jr. said at the International 
Astronautical Congress in Daejeon that future cooperation with the 
ROK would be possible in such areas as lunar exploration, satellites 
and the field of aeronautics. (Chosun, Hankyoreh, Segye) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, during an Oct. 13 press 
conference in Russia, said "We have absolutely no intention of 
relaxing or offering to relax North Korean sanctions at this point 
whatsoever." (Chosun, all TVs) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo and all TV networks gave coverage to Oct. 
13 press remarks in Russia by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in 
which she said: "We have absolutely no intention of relaxing or 
offering to relax North Korean sanctions at this point whatsoever." 
 
 
North Korea's acceptance yesterday of Seoul's proposal for 
inter-Korean talks over flood prevention and humanitarian issues 
received wide press attention.  Most media noted that this 
conciliatory North Korean gesture came one day after it test-fired 
 
SEOUL 00001620  002 OF 007 
 
 
five short-range missiles off its east coast, and criticized the 
North's two-faced attitude of conducting missile tests while at the 
same time seeking negotiations. 
 
Most media also reported that the ROK military is on the alert for 
more North Korean short-range missile tests after the North declared 
a navigation ban also in the West Sea.  A ROKG source was quoted as 
saying: "Although there are no concrete signs of preparations for 
missile tests yet, we're watching closely in the West Sea." 
 
The ROKG's low-profile response to North Korea's Oct. 12 missile 
launches also received wide press attention.  An ROK Foreign 
Ministry official was quoted: "The North's missile launch was a 
violation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1874, but we have no 
plan to make an official announcement." 
 
Most newspapers observed that this ROKG move is in stark contrast to 
its reaction after Pyongyang's July 4 launch of one short-range and 
six mid-range missiles over the East Sea, and seems to have come out 
of consideration of the upcoming working-level talks with North 
Korea slated for today and tomorrow. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "UN sanctions against North 
Korea have been undermined by China's recent offer of massive aid to 
North Korea.  ... In this situation, the ROKG is also considering 
providing the North with 10,000 to 30,000 tons of rice. ... If we 
pull the teeth out of the sanctions against North Korea even before 
starting talks with North Korea, we cannot reach the goal of 
denuclearizing North Korea." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
CO2 EMISSIONS AND GDP 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 14, 2009, page 38) 
 
By Editorial writer Park Yeong-kyun 
 
Seattle Mayor Greg Nickels announced Oct. 2 that 1,000 U.S. mayors 
signed an agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in line with 
Kyoto Protocol standards.  The mayors urged the U.S. federal and 
state governments to cut greenhouse gas emissions seven percent from 
1990 levels by 2012.  In 2005, Seattle cut CO2 levels eight percent 
and Los Angeles seven percent from 1990 levels.  The U.S. has been 
criticized for its lukewarm effort to cut such emissions, but the 
amount of greenhouse gases reduced due to voluntary efforts by state 
governments is equivalent to that of the European Union and Japan. 
 
In the growth rate of CO2 emissions since 1990, the ROK ranked first 
among member nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development.  According to the International Energy Agency, the 
ROK's CO2 emissions in 2007 jumped a whopping 113 percent from 1990, 
the highest growth in the OECD.  The country also remained the 
world's ninth-largest greenhouse gas emitter between 2006 and 2007, 
following China, the U.S., Russia, India, Japan, Germany, Canada and 
Britain. 
 
It makes sense that CO2emissions increase when GDP increases because 
of (the effect of) economic growth.  Economic growth explains why 
China, dubbed "the world's factory," has become the world's largest 
CO2emitter and why other emerging economies such as Russia and India 
rank high on the list.  The ROK is different, however.  Korea's 
nominal GDP ranked 11th in the world in 2003 but fell behind those 
of India, Brazil, Russia and Australia to drop four notches to 15th 
place in 2007.  Nevertheless, the level of ROK's CO2 emissions has 
remained unchanged because its economy is heavily dependent on 
manufacturing, which uses coal and produces a large amount of carbon 
emissions. 
 
At this year's U.N. Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, global 
leaders will discuss the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions after 
2013.  The ROK is highly likely to be subject to mandatory caps on 
emissions.  At a U.N. climate conference last month, leaders of 
 
SEOUL 00001620  003 OF 007 
 
 
major economies such as the U.S., China and India promised to cut 
emissions.  The European Union announced a cut of 20 percent and 
Japan 25 percent from 1990 levels and the U.S. 17 percent from 2005 
levels.  The ROK has suggested three scenarios: increasing 
greenhouse gas emissions no more than eight percent; a stop to a 
further rise of emissions; or a cut of four percent from 2005 
levels.  Yet just a few years are left before 2013.  The ROK must 
urgently pursue a green growth strategy contributing to reducing CO2 
emissions. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
USING IMJIN RIVER TALKS TO SHIFT N. KOREA POLICY 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, October 14, 2009, page 35) 
 
This week, a group of meetings is scheduled between South Korean and 
North Korean authorities.  They have agreed to hold working-level 
talks in Kaesong on Wednesday in order to prevent a reoccurrence of 
the Imjin River flood disaster, and a Red Cross working-level 
meeting on Friday.  Apart from the Red Cross talks, where matters 
such as reunions for separated families during the Chuseok holiday 
and humanitarian aid to North Korea were discussed, this is the 
first time in over three months that authorities from the two 
countries have met directly.  The third set of working-level talks 
in July which discussed issues pertaining to economic collaboration 
on the Kaesong Industrial Complex was the last time the two 
countries met.  This is the first positive news in some time for 
people concerned that North Korea's relations with the U.S. and 
China are advancing ahead of its relations with the ROK. 
 
When the ROK proposed these talks and a schedule, North Korea 
accepted immediately without modifications.  This is another 
indication of North Korea's active determination to improve 
inter-Korean relations that has been sustained continuously ever 
since the mourning delegation's visit to pay their respects at the 
memorial service of late President Kim Dae-jung in Aug.  It also 
coincides with Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao's statement at the 
second trilateral leaders' meeting of China, the ROK and Japan on 
Saturday, when he remarked that North Korea's intent to improve 
inter-Korean relations was the strongest sense he felt during his 
visit to North Korea. 
 
On the other hand, although the ROK first proposed the dialogue, it 
still seems that it delayed too long in setting the meeting.  One 
cannot erase the sense that authorities waited and failed to take 
action following the Imjin River flood disaster, when talk was rife 
about the need for inter-Korean dialogue to prevent similar 
incidents from occurring in the future, and were only compelled to 
take action after China's strong urging to engage in dialogue.  The 
status and level of the dialogue also appear to be merely 
working-level and casual, in contrast to the actions of North Korea, 
the U.S. and China, which are taking the first steps in the broader 
scheme of things toward a solution for the North Korean nuclear 
issue through dialogue. 
 
There are important matters to address at the Imjin River talks. 
Responsibility for the disaster needs to be clearly established, and 
a plan needs to be set in place so that the incident is not 
repeated.  At the Red Cross talks, it is important to stress that 
separated family members who do not have long to live should be 
allowed to meet and not be forced to wait for a holiday or special 
occasion, and that food aid would be provided to North Koreans 
suffering from starvation.  North Korea, for its part, should not 
simply make demands, but give an explanation and express its remorse 
for its role in the Imjin River disaster. 
 
The list of matters to discuss, however, should not stop there.  As 
inter-Korean relations remain stagnant, North Korea and China are 
rapidly growing closer in political and economic terms.  While the 
ROK is focusing only on sanctions against North Korea, its ability 
to make its voice heard on issues related to the Korean Peninsula is 
growing weaker. Without an improvement in inter-Korean relations, it 
 
SEOUL 00001620  004 OF 007 
 
 
will be difficult for us to play a greater role in regional affairs. 
 We hope the Lee Administration uses this series of talks as an 
opportunity to affect a major shift in its North Korea policy. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
N. KOREA IS BACK ON TOP OF ITS GAME 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 14, 2009, page 39) 
 
North Korea fired five short-range missiles from its eastern coast 
on Monday capable of hitting targets 120 km away.  The missiles pose 
one of the greatest threats to the ROK.  North Korea also declared 
an area off South Pyongan Province in the west off-limits to ships, 
which suggests it is preparing to fire missiles from its western 
coast as well. 
 
From April to July, North Korea fired a total of 18 missiles and 
conducted one nuclear test.  For three months after that, it 
appeared to have calmed down.  Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, who 
visited Pyongyang early this month, told President Lee Myung-bak and 
Japanese Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama, "This is the time to talk to 
North Korea."  But now the North has conducted another series of 
missile tests even before the echo of Wen's comments had gone 
silent. 
 
The missile tests violate UN Security Council resolutions.  UN 
sanctions against North Korea have been undermined by China's recent 
offer of massive aid to North Korea.  In this situation, the ROKG is 
also considering providing the North with 10,000 to 30,000 tons of 
rice.  At this point, who is in a position to call for additional 
sanctions against the North for violating the UN resolutions? 
 
The ROKG said the missile tests could be part of North Korea's 
efforts to improve the range of the missiles.  In other words, the 
latest missile launches may not be attempts by North Korea to 
pressure the ROK, the U.S. and the international community.  The 
U.S. is trying hard to ignore the tests, apparently because 
Washington wants to minimize the impact and continue in an 
atmosphere of dialogue. 
 
Even countries that are at war with each other hold talks.  What 
matters is their purpose.  Sanctions and dialogue are both part of 
the two-pronged strategy to get North Korea to abandon its nuclear 
weapons program.  Sanctions alone will not be effective, and talks 
will not be able to end the nuclear standoff.  The key lesson from 
past disasters is that sanctions and dialogue must be pursued 
together. 
 
But if we pull the teeth out of the sanctions against North Korea 
even before starting talks with North Korea, we cannot reach the 
goal of denuclearizing North Korea.  The situation has deteriorated 
to this level because the ROK, the U.S., China and Japan have all 
either taken individual steps to talk with North Korea or have taken 
part in measures that weaken UN sanctions without agreeing on a 
concerted strategy. 
 
As if nothing had happened, only a day after its missile launches 
North Korea accepted an ROK proposal for talks to control the 
release of water from dams along the Imjin River and to discuss 
additional reunions of separate families. Pyongyang has regained 
control of the situation. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
N. KOREA'S DUAL ATTITUDE 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 14, 2009, page 46) 
 
Inter-Korean talks will take place starting today to discuss ways to 
prevent damage from flooding at the Imjin River.  The ROKG proposed 
talks with North Korea two days ago and North Korea accepted the 
 
SEOUL 00001620  005 OF 007 
 
 
offer in one day.  The talks will be working-level but will carry 
significance in that inter-Korean talks, which have been stalled for 
almost two years, will resume.  However, North Korea launched five 
short-range missiles over the East Sea on the same day that the ROKG 
proposed the talks.  This violates the UN Security Council 
Resolution that bans test-firing of ballistic missiles.  It seems 
that North Korea fired the missiles in response to the two-track 
policy by the ROK, the U.S. and Japan to pursue both pressure and 
dialogue at the same time to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue. 
 North Korea is making deliberate moves to leverage its bargaining 
position prior to talks with the U.S.  We need to understand North 
Korea's intentions properly in order to respond to them effectively. 
 
 
We assume that North Korea has agreed to the inter-Korean talks 
based on its judgment that talks with the U.S. will not go smoothly 
unless tensions on the Korean Peninsula abate.  This assumption 
seems reasonable in that North Korea agreed to talk with the ROK on 
agenda items that include the North's apology for the unannounced 
discharge of the Hwanggang Dam and measures to prevent recurrence of 
such an incident.  (Previously) the North would not have easily 
accepted these agenda items as topics for discussion even when there 
was a thaw in inter-Korean relations.  In the same vein, North Korea 
agreed to hold talks focused on arranging reunions of families 
separated by the Korean War.  Whatever their motive, North Korea's 
willingness to discuss the agenda is a positive sign.  We hope that 
this will facilitate further inter-Korean talks and pave the way for 
inter-Korean issues to be settled quickly.  In addition, we urge 
North Korea to work on ways to resolve the nuclear issue at the 
inter-Korean talks. 
 
North Korea's intentions behind the missile launches appear much 
more complicated.  The KN-02 missiles North Korea fired this time 
are an updated version (of the Russian SS-21.)  Analysts say that 
the missiles will strike not only the metropolitan area and 
Pyeongtaek naval base but also Pyeongtaek's U.S. military bases, 
which are currently under construction.  It seems that North Korea 
intended to put military pressure on the ROK and the U.S. by 
displaying improved missile capabilities.  North Korea wanted to 
prove that joint U.S.-ROK military forces would not be able to 
easily respond to its missile launches because its missiles use 
solid fuel and are fired from mobile launchers.  North Korea also 
seemed to have a political intention to gain a stronger bargaining 
position in talks with the U.S.  North Korea apparently is seeking 
to become more insistent in its demands while the U.S is expected to 
focus on the North's nuclear dismantlement.  North Korea is calling 
on the U.S. to shift its antagonistic policy toward the North.  In 
this regard, North Korea is directly targeting the alliance between 
the ROK and the U.S.  North Korea is likely to demand that the U.S. 
back off its commitment to extend a nuclear umbrella over the ROK 
and that the U.S. pull its forces out of the Korean Peninsula in 
return for the North accepting U.S. demands.  This is what the ROK 
should be most cautious about. 
 
Whatever motives North Korea has, we should rein in the situation 
according to our objectives and plans.  We should devise ways to 
maximize our national interest by considering many factors such as 
inter-Korean relations, North Korea-China relations, ROK-U.S. 
relations and U.S.-North dialogue.  To this end, we should take 
action strategically and promptly based on the rational and careful 
judgment without being swayed by the fast-changing situation.  The 
ROKG's capability in diplomacy and security will be tested from now 
on. 
 
 
FEATURES 
--------- 
 
"OBAMA EFFECT;" WIND OF RECONCILIATION BLOWING AROUND THE GLOBE 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 14, 2009, Page 14) 
 
By Reporter Nam Jung-ho 
 
Way to a World beyond Borders 
 
SEOUL 00001620  006 OF 007 
 
 
 
Although there is some controversy over U.S. President Barack 
Obama's winning of the Nobel Peace Prize, it is true that a "balmy 
breeze of reconciliation" started to blow in every corner of the 
world.  Obama's style of "Smart Power" - a policy under which the 
U.S. breaks with unilateralism and uses a proper combination of 
military power and diplomatic resolutions - is changing the global 
atmosphere.  This is the result of Obama's efforts toward the "world 
beyond our border," which is stated in his book, "The Audacity of 
Hope." 
 
Since his inauguration, President Obama traveled more than any of 
his predecessors.  Consequently, as the world is trying to go beyond 
barriers of race, ideology, and power struggle and resolve issues 
through dialogue, the global map of foreign relations is changing. 
 
Thaw in Conflict Areas 
 
First of all, the situation regarding North Korea's and Iran's 
nuclear proliferation, which deteriorated under former George W. 
Bush's hard-line policy, has changed.  The North Korean nuclear 
issue has entered into a phase of dialogue, although it is 
conditional on the beginning of U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks. 
Iran also said that it will accept international inspection of its 
uranium enrichment facilities. 
 
Another significant progress is the U.S.-Russia agreement on nuclear 
arms reduction.  Under the leadership of President Obama, the U.S. 
and Russia agreed to reduce their nuclear warheads from the current 
6,000 to 1,500-1,750.  In addition, efforts are undergoing to 
improve relations with Cuba and Venezuela, countries which the U.S. 
had classified as its enemy states until recently.  Since President 
Obama has also been emphasizing "engagement with enemies," hopes of 
a thaw in relations with these countries are being raised. 
 
"Smart Power" Diplomacy 
 
Many observers say that Obama's many achievements in just eight 
months in office are directly related to his foreign policy 
philosophy.  Above all, he is opposed to U.S. unilateralism based on 
military power.  He believes that the U.S. should gauge the opinion 
of every nation before building a global consensus and then make a 
joint response. 
 
This belief is clearly set out in his book, "The Audacity of Hope." 
In the book, he argued, "It will almost always be in our strategic 
interest to act multilaterally rather than unilaterally when we use 
force around the world."  Therefore, he prefers the "Smart Power" 
diplomacy - using a proper mixture of military power and diplomatic 
negotiations. 
 
U.S. Approval Ratings Soaring 
 
The global image of the U.S., which worsened after wars broke out in 
Afghanistan and Iraq following the September 11 terrorist attacks, 
has improved noticeably since President Obama took office.  Coupled 
with the popularity of the first U.S. African-American President, a 
change in the U.S. attitude won a favorable response especially from 
Europe. 
 
A recent Pew Research Center survey found that favorable views of 
the U.S. jumped from 31 percent in 2008 to 64 percent this year in 
Germany; 33 percent to 58 percent in Spain; and 42 percent to 75 
percent in France.  The same trend was also shown in Middle East 
countries, such Egypt and Jordan. 
 
Challenges ahead 
 
It cannot be said, however, that there are no knotty problems for 
Obama.  Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq are the biggest concern. 
During his presidential campaign, Obama pledged to pull out troops 
(from the region).  However, Obama is concerned that if the U.S. 
withdraws its troops, both conflicts could degenerate into "failed 
wars."  Therefore, the question of how to wrap up the wars in 
 
SEOUL 00001620  007 OF 007 
 
 
Afghanistan and Iraq, which are still claiming many lives, is 
expected to serve as a test for Obama's foreign policy. 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>