^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1928 | 2009-12-08 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 8일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001928

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 12월 8일
번역자: PoirotKr(트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/07/05 00:04//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
수리 '나' 만점자 작년의 9배 상위권 변별력 크게 떨어져

중앙일보
대기업 본사 세종시 이전 힘들다

동아일보
2만5000km 자전거 대장정

한국일보
정부, 연내 세종시 초안 2개 제시

한겨레 신문
“신성해운, 2004년 한상률에 5천만원 줬다” 진술받고도 검찰 “혐의없다” 소환안해

세계일보
전국 19개 철도노선 전철화 추진

서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
[2009 수능 성적발표] 가·나군 중 1곳 안정지원, 1곳 소신지원

===== 국내 동향 =====

한국과 미국이 내년 2+2 장관회의를 준비하기 위해 다음 주 초 양국의 국장급 외교부 국방부 관계자들이 참석하는 "2+2 국장회의"를 처음으로 개최할 예정이다. ([[http://car.donga.com/ISSUE/Vote2016/News?m=view&date=20091208&gid=24646669|동아]])

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

한국·미국·일본 3개국이 북한의 6자회담 복귀에 대비, 비핵화를 위한 로드맵 작성에 들어갔다고 아사히신문이 7일 보도했다. ([[http://www.kinds.or.kr/search/totalSearchView.do?news_id=01101101.20091207100020620|한국]], 세계, 서울)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 보즈워스의 방북 ====

대다수 언론은 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 오늘 북한을 방문한다는 소식에 주목했다.

보수 조선일보 사설: "북한은 핵 보유 집착을 포기하지 않을 것이고, 6자회담 참여국들도 북한 핵의 과거는 묻어두고 현재와 미래 확산을 막는 쪽으로 움직일 것이라는 우려가 한국 내에서 나오고 있다. …북한의 과거 핵을 묵인하거나 후(後)순위에 두는 것은 북한 핵 그늘 속으로 대한민국의 장래를 밀어 넣는 것이다. …보즈워스 대표는 그의 방북을 바라보는 한국 내 우려를 분명히 인식하고 북한과의 회담에 임해야 한다."

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설: "우리는 북한이 보즈워스 대표에게 6자회담 복귀 의사를 밝힐 것을 다시 한번 촉구한다. 북한이 강조하는 북·미 평화협정 체결 문제는 이미 6자회담 틀 내에 논의의 장이 마련돼 있는 사안이다. 나아가 6자회담에는 북한 비핵화의 대가로 막대한 경제적 지원과 북한의 체제 유지 방책이란 선물까지 준비돼 있다. …핵 포기 의사가 없는 것이 아니라면 북한이 6자회담이 아닌 다른 곳에서 더 많은 것을 얻어낼 가능성은 없다고 단언할 수 있다."

좌파 성향 한겨레 신문이 사설에서 주장한 내용: "하지만 이번 대화가 단지 미국의 입장을 전달하는 자리에 그쳐서는 안 된다. 이제까지 6자회담이 정체를 거듭해온 주된 이유는 서로의 요구와 실천 의지가 달랐던 데 있고, 그 배후에는 뿌리 깊은 불신이 있었다. …따라서 신뢰 구축은 이번 대화의 가장 큰 목표 가운데 하나가 돼야 한다."

==== 코펜하겐 기후 변화 회담 ====

중도 한국일보가 사설에서 주장한 내용: "오랜 쟁점인 온실가스 감축 수치목표에 합의할 수 있을지는 여전히 불투명하다. …당장 세계 2위 온실가스 배출국인 미국이 자세 변화를 보이면서도 유럽과 일본 등 다른 선진국의 평균적 감각과는 동떨어진 수치목표를 제시하고 있고, 미래의 주된 온실가스 배출국으로 떠오른 중국과 인도 등의 적극적 감축 노력도 현실적으로 기대하기 어렵다. …버락 오바마 미 대통령을 비롯한 주요 정치 지도자들의 결단이 요구된다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[사설]보즈워스, 북한의 미래 핵과 과거 핵 함께 다뤄야**(2009년 12월 7일, 35면)

미국 국무부 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표가 오바마 대통령 특사 자격으로 8~10일 평양을 방문한다. 보즈워스 대사는 7일 서울에서 김성환 청와대 외교안보 수석, 위성락 외교부 한반도 평화교섭본부장 등을 만나 미·북회담 의제 등을 최종 점검했다.

보즈워스 대표는 "북한이 어떤 이야기를 하는지 들어보는 데 주력할 것"이라고 했다. 미국 정부는 보즈워스의 방북 목표가 북한을 6자회담에 복귀시키고, 북한이 핵 폐기 조치를 취하면 한국·미국·중국·일본·러시아 등이 전력 지원 등을 하기로 한 2005년 9·19 공동성명 이행을 촉구하는 것이라고 밝혔다.

현재 핵무기 개발로 국제사회와 충돌하고 있는 나라는 북한과 이란이다. 이란 핵 문제엔 미국뿐 아니라 유럽연합, 국제원자력기구 등이 직접 나서 강온(强穩) 양면 전술을 구사하며 해결을 시도하고 있다.

이란의 경우와 비교하면 국제사회가 북한 핵 문제 해결에 충분한 노력을 기울이고 있는지 의문스럽다.

북한은 지난 5월 25일 최대 20㏏으로 추정되는 2차 핵실험을 했다. 2006년 1차 핵실험의 폭발력은 0.8㏏이었다. 한·미 당국은 북한이 6~8개 핵무기를 생산할 수 있는 플루토늄을 확보하고, 우라늄 농축 핵프로그램도 가동해 온 것으로 보고 있다. 북한은 자신들을 "핵보유국으로 인정하라"고 주장하고 있다.

보즈워스 대표가 이행을 요구할 9·19 공동성명의 1차적 초점은 북한 핵 활동 동결과 핵시설 불능화에 맞춰져 있다. 북한 핵의 현재와 미래를 묶어두는 것이 주 목표인 것이다.

북한이 과거에 만든 플루토늄이나 핵탄두 등은 북한 스스로 신고하도록 돼 있다. 북한 핵과 미사일의 기술적 한계 등을 감안하면 북한의 과거 핵이 미국에 직접적 위협이 안 될 수 있다. 중국과 러시아도 북한이 자신들을 향해 핵무기를 쓰지 않을 것으로 판단하고 있을 것이다. 일본은 지리적·정치적 이유로 북한이 확보한 핵 능력에 민감한 반응을 보이고 있지만 '핵보유국 북한'의 심각성만 놓고 보면 한국만큼 절실하지 않다.

북한은 핵 보유 집착을 포기하지 않을 것이고, 6자회담 참여국들도 북한 핵의 과거는 묻어두고 현재와 미래 확산을 막는 쪽으로 움직일 것이라는 우려가 한국 내에서 나오고 있다.

북한의 과거 핵을 묵인하거나 후(後)순위에 두는 것은 북한 핵 그늘 속으로 대한민국의 장래를 밀어 넣는 것이다. 6자회담을 통한 북한 핵 해법이 과거 핵 문제를 정면으로 다루지 않는다면 대한민국은 남·북한 핵 불균형을 타개할 여러 근본적 조치를 강구할 수밖에 없다. 보즈워스 대표는 그의 방북을 바라보는 한국 내 우려를 분명히 인식하고 북한과의 회담에 임해야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 시작된 북-미 대화, 신뢰 구축이 중요하다**(한겨레신문, 2009년 12월 8일, 35면)

스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표가 버락 오바마 대통령의 특사 자격으로 오늘 북한을 방문한다. 오바마 정권이 출범한 지 10개월 반, 빌 클린턴 전 대통령이 방북한 지 4개월여 만이다. 상당 기간 뜸을 들인 공식 대화 자리인 만큼 좋은 성과를 내길 기대한다.

미국과 한국 정부는 이번 대화의 의제가 ‘6자회담 재개와 북한의 9·19공동성명 이행 촉구’라고 말한다. 북한이 요구해온 ‘양자협상’이 아니라고 선을 그은 것이다. 이런 입장은 타당한 측면이 있다. 북한이 여전히 6자회담 복귀 뜻을 분명히 하지 않은 상태에서 미국과 북한이 주고받기식 협상을 벌여서는 6자회담은 물론 핵문제 전체의 앞날이 불투명해질 수 있다.

하지만 이번 대화가 단지 미국의 입장을 전달하는 자리에 그쳐서는 안 된다. 이제까지 6자회담이 정체를 거듭해온 주된 이유는 서로의 요구와 실천 의지가 달랐던 데 있고, 그 배후에는 뿌리 깊은 불신이 있었다.

지금도 기본적인 신뢰가 확보되지 않는다면 회담이 재개돼도 순조로운 진전을 기대하긴 어렵다. 따라서 신뢰 구축은 이번 대화의 가장 큰 목표 가운데 하나가 돼야 한다.

무엇보다 보즈워스 대표는 북한이 얻을 수 있는 것들을 설득력 있게 제시해야 한다. 실제 협상은 나중에 이뤄지더라도 큰 틀에 대한 공감대가 만들어져야 북한이 쉽게 6자회담 복귀 결정을 내릴 수 있기 때문이다. 이와 관련해 최근 북한 쪽이 밝힌 평화협정 체결 또는 평화체제 구축 문제도 무작정 이후 과제로 미룰 게 아니라 미국의 구상을 제시하고 동의를 끌어내길 바란다.

북한은 지금이 6자회담에 복귀할 적기임을 알아야 한다. 오바마 대통령이 ‘핵 없는 세계’를 공언하는 등 회담 참가국들의 비핵화 의지는 어느 때보다 높다. 오바마 행정부는 과거 어느 미국 정권보다도 대북 핵 협상에 열린 자세를 갖고 있기도 하다. 또한 국제사회는 북한이 어떤 태도를 취하는지를 보고 제재 계속 여부를 저울질할 것이다.

일부에서는 미국과 북한이 이번 대화 이후 급을 높여 한 차례쯤 더 만날 것으로 내다본다. 설령 그럴 필요가 있다고 하더라도 이번에 충분히 깊이있는 논의를 해 틀을 잘 짜야 한다. 우리나라를 비롯한 관련국들도 두 나라의 대화가 잘되도록 적극 협력해야 함은 물론이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 보즈워스를 만날 북한, 선택은 6자회담뿐이다**(중앙일보, 2009년 12월 8일, 38면)

스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표 일행이 오늘 평양을 방문한다. 지난해 12월을 마지막으로 중단된 6자회담에 북한이 복귀하도록 설득하고 비(非)핵화 약속을 지키도록 촉구하기 위해서다. 그러나 북한은 보즈워스 일행의 방문을 앞두고 조선신보 등을 통해 북·미 간 평화협정 문제가 최대 쟁점이라고 강조하는 등 딴소리를 하고 있다. 우리 정부도 북한이 북·미 간 평화협정 체결 문제를 제기할 것을 우려해 유명환 외교통상부 장관이 최근 “평화협정은 남북한이 체결해야 하며 미국과 중국이 정전협정 당사자로 참여해야 할 것”이라고 공개 천명했다. 1년 만에 핵 문제를 다루는 대화의 자리가 마련됐지만 미리부터 관련 국가들 사이의 신경전이 치열하다.

북한 핵 문제 논의가 진전을 이뤘던 계기는 두 차례 있었다. 1994년 제네바 북·미 합의와 2005년 6자회담 ‘9·19 공동성명’이다. 그러나 합의는 매번 중도에 깨졌다. 그 과정에서 북한은 2차례 핵실험 도발을 강행했고, 국제사회는 유엔 안전보장이사회의 대북 제재 결의 채택 등으로 압박했다. 현재는 북한에 6자회담 복귀를 촉구하는 상황이다. 그렇지만 이번 보즈워스 대표의 방북으로 북한이 6자회담에 복귀할지는 불투명하다. 보즈워스 대표조차 “북한이 어떻게 나올지 누가 알겠느냐”고 말해 방북 성과를 낙관하지 못하고 있다.

우리는 북한이 보즈워스 대표에게 6자회담 복귀 의사를 밝힐 것을 다시 한번 촉구한다. 북한이 강조하는 북·미 평화협정 체결 문제는 이미 6자회담 틀 내에 논의의 장이 마련돼 있는 사안이다. 나아가 6자회담에는 북한 비핵화의 대가로 막대한 경제적 지원과 북한의 체제 유지 방책이란 선물까지 준비돼 있다. 이 모든 것을 규정한 것이 ‘9·19 공동성명’이다. 미·일·중·러 등 동북아시아 강대국이 망라돼 있고 북한 핵 포기에 가장 이해관계가 큰 한국도 참여하고 있다. 합리적 수준이라면 북한의 요구를 최대한 충족시킬 수 있는 틀이 바로 6자회담인 것이다. 핵 포기 의사가 없는 것이 아니라면 북한이 6자회담이 아닌 다른 곳에서 더 많은 것을 얻어낼 가능성은 없다고 단언할 수 있다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://www.hankyung.com/news/app/newsview.php?aid=2009120721671|美 "한·미 FTA 다시 점검중"…韓 "비준 더이상 늦추지 말라"]]**(한국경제신문, 12월 8일 4면)

유승호 기자

웬디 커틀러 미국 무역대표부(USTR) 대표보는 "한 · 미 자유무역협정(FTA)에 대해 다시 점검하고 있다"며 "미국 의회 및 여러 이해 당사자와 함께 노력해 협상안에 대한 가장 폭넓은 지지를 이끌어내겠다"고 7일 말했다. 자동차를 비롯한 일부 내용에 대해 재협상이 필요하다는 기존 입장을 재확인한 것이다.

커틀러 대표보는 이날 한국무역협회와 미국 피터슨국제경제연구소가 서울 삼성동 코엑스에서 공동 개최한 '위기 이후의 새로운 국제 무역질서' 컨퍼런스에 참석,"한 · 미 FTA 타결 이후 미국 내에서 첨예한 공방이 있었고 새 대통령이 취임하면서 재검토가 이루어지고 있다"며 이같이 밝혔다.

그는 한 · 미 FTA의 내용을 재검토하고 있는 배경에 대해 "자동차업계를 비롯한 이해 당사자와 의회에서 우려를 표명하고 있기 때문"이라고 설명했다. 그는 "한 · 미 양국의 지도자는 FTA를 발효시키려는 의지가 강하다"며 "우려되는 사항에 대해 한국과 건설적이고 창의적인 방법으로 논의해 한 · 미 FTA를 이른 시일 내에 발전시키고자 하는 게 우리의 뜻"이라고 강조했다.

커틀러 대표보는 한 · 미 FTA 발효가 지연됨에 따라 미국 기업이 손해를 보고 있지 않느냐는 질문에 대해 "일부 업계에서 우려하고 있다"며 "최소한 한 · EU(유럽연합) FTA와 비슷한 시기에 한 · 미 FTA가 발효돼 미국 기업이 유럽 기업보다 불리해지지 않았으면 한다"고 답했다.

커틀러 대표보의 발언에 대해 이혜민 외교통상부 FTA 교섭대표는 재협상에 관한 직접적인 언급은 피한 채 조기 비준의 필요성을 강조했다.

이 대표는 "한 · 미 FTA는 양국에 실익을 가져오기 때문에 더 이상 늦추지 말고 조속히 비준해야 한다"고 말했다. 그는 "한 · 미 FTA와 한 · EU FTA가 거의 같은 시기에 비준되길 바란다"며 "한국의 포괄적 FTA는 세계무역기구(WTO)의 다자주의 노력을 보완하는 역할을 할 수 있다"고 설명했다. 이 대표는 이어 "한 · 중 · 일 3개국 FTA에 대해 내년 초부터 타당성 조사를 개시할 예정"이라고 밝혔다.

(편집자 주: 중앙일보는 같은 내용의 기사를 “한·미 FTA 관련 미 자동차업계 의견 수집”란 제목으로 게재했다. 중앙의 보도 내용: <웬디 커틀러 미 무역대표부 대표보는 7일 한·미 자유무역협정(FTA) 비준에 대해 “자동차 업계 등 이해 당사자의 우려와 의견을 수집하고 있다”며 “가능한 한 빠르게 한국 측과 논의해 진전시킬 것”이라고 말했다. 그는 이어 “한·EU FTA가 한·미 FTA와 차이는 없는지, 먼저 발효될 경우 미국에 미치는 영향은 없는지 등을 검토하고 있다”고 덧붙였다.>

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1928.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SEOUL 001928 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; December 8, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Number of Students who Get Perfect Scores 
on College Entrance Math Test Increases Ninefold This Year 
 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Senior ROKG Official: "It will be Difficult to Relocate Head Offices 
of Large Companies to Sejong City" 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
"Last Chance to Save the Planet"... Climate Conference 
Opens in Copenhagen 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
ROKG to Present Two Alternative Development Plans 
for Sejong City This Year 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Prosecutors Did Not Summon Former National Tax Service Chief Even 
After Securing Testimony that the Former NTS Chief Received Money 
from Local Shipping Company 
 
Segye Ilbo 
ROKG Seeks Electrification of 19 Railways Nationwide 
 
Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
Annual College Entrance Exam Results Announced 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
The ROK and the U.S. will hold their first "two-plus-two" meeting 
attended by director-level foreign affairs and defense officials 
from the two countries in Washington early next week in order to 
prepare for next year's ministerial-level "two-plus-two" meeting. 
(Dong-a) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to the Dec. 7 issue of Japan's Asahi Shimbun, the ROK, the 
U.S. and Japan have begun drawing up a roadmap for denuclearizing 
North Korea in preparation for the North's return to the Six-Party 
Talks. (Hankook, Segye, Seoul) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-Ambassador Bosworth's Visit to North Korea 
------------------------------------------ 
Most media gave attention to U.S. Special Representative for North 
Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth's trip to North Korea today. 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "There is concern in the ROK 
that North Korea will not give up its nuclear ambitions and that the 
countries in the Six-Party Talks may move to bury the North's past 
nuclear activities and focus on preventing the North from 
proliferating its current and future nuclear weapons and 
technologies.  Giving tacit approval to the North's past nuclear 
activities or putting the issue on the back burner is like throwing 
the ROK's future into the North's nuclear shade.  ...  Ambassador 
Bosworth should clearly realize this ROK concern before engaging in 
talks with North Korea." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "We once again urge 
North Korea to express its intention to Ambassador Bosworth to 
 
SEOUL 00001928  002 OF 005 
 
 
return to the Six-Party Talks.  The Six-Party Talks already have a 
venue to discuss the issue of signing a peace treaty (on the Korean 
Peninsula) as requested by North Korea.   Furthermore, the Six-Party 
Talks are prepared to offer North Korea massive economic aid and 
security assurances in return for its denuclearization.  ... If 
North Korea truly intends to abandon its nuclear ambitions, there is 
no better place than the Six-Party Talks from which it can receive 
massive benefits." 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun argued in an editorial: "This 
(U.S.-North Korea) dialogue should not end up being a mere venue to 
deliver the U.S.'s position.  The main reason why the Six-Party 
Talks have repeatedly stalled is that the two countries have 
different demands and different motivations for implementing their 
commitments.  This is backed by a deep-seated mutual distrust.   ... 
 Accordingly, trust-building should be one of the big objectives of 
this dialogue." 
 
-Copenhagen Climate Change Conference 
------------------------------------- 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo observed in an editorial: "It remains unclear 
whether countries can agree to a target of reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions, a long-standing issue of contention. ...  The U.S., the 
world's second biggest emitter of greenhouse gases, has recently 
shown a change in its attitude, but its reduction target falls far 
short of what other advanced countries, including Europe and Japan, 
may have hoped for.  Furthermore, it is realistically difficult to 
expect China and India, which have emerged as major carbon emitters 
in the future, to make proactive reduction efforts. ... It is high 
time for major world leaders, including President Barack Obama, to 
make a decision." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
BOSWORTH MUST BEAR ROK'S CONCERNS IN MIND 
(Chosun Ilbo, December 7, 2009, Page 35) 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
visits Pyongyang on Tuesday and Wednesday.  Bosworth stopped over in 
Seoul before heading to North Korea and met here with Kim Sung-hwan, 
the Chief Presidential Secretary for National Security, and Wi 
Sung-lac, the ROK's point man in nuclear talks. 
 
"We will focus on listening to what North Korea has to say," 
Bosworth said.  The U.S. government says Bosworth's objective is to 
get North Korea to return to the stalled Six-Party Talks and to live 
up to its pledges signed in the Sep. 19, 2005 statement of 
principles, in which (North Korea would receive) fuel and other 
support in exchange for scrapping its nuclear program. 
 
Iran and North Korea are the two countries clashing with the 
international community due to their nuclear weapons programs.  The 
U.S., EU and even the International Atomic Energy Agency are 
employing various methods to resolve the nuclear standoff with Iran. 
 But it is questionable whether the international community is 
exerting as much effort when it comes to North Korea. 
 
North Korea conducted a second nuclear test on May 25 involving an 
estimated 20 kt of fissile materials.  The first test in 2006 
involved only 0.8 kt.  ROK and U.S. officials believe North Korea 
has enough plutonium to make six to eight nuclear weapons and has 
been operating a uranium enrichment program as well.  North Korea is 
demanding that the international community accept it as a nuclear 
state. 
 
The primary focus of the Sep. 19 statement, which Bosworth will ask 
North Korea to live up to, involves freezing and disabling the 
nuclear programs and facilities.  The main focus is to prevent North 
Korea from making nuclear arms. 
 
The North is required to voluntarily report its plutonium stockpiles 
and nuclear warheads.  Considering the limitations in its missile 
 
SEOUL 00001928  003 OF 005 
 
 
and nuclear technology, the North's achievements so far may not pose 
a serious threat to the U.S., and China and Russia may believe North 
Korea will not aim its missiles at them.  Japan is sensitive to 
North Korea's nuclear arsenal for geographic and diplomatic reasons, 
but does not face the same threat as the ROK. 
 
There is concern in the ROK that North Korea will not give up its 
nuclear ambitions and that the countries in the Six-Party Talks may 
move to bury the North's past nuclear activities and focus on 
preventing the North from proliferating its current and future 
nuclear weapons and technologies. 
 
Giving tacit approval to the North's past nuclear activities or 
putting the issue on the back burner is like throwing the ROK's 
future into the North's nuclear shade.  If the Six-Party Talks fail 
to address them, the ROK will have no choice but to look at a range 
of fundamental measures to overcome the nuclear imbalance. 
Ambassador Bosworth should clearly realize this ROK concern before 
engaging in talks with North Korea. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
BUILDING TRUST IN THE N. KOREA-U.S. BILATERAL DIALOGUE 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, December 8, 2009, Page 35) 
 
Stephen Bosworth, U.S. special representative for North Korea 
policy, visits North Korea today as a special envoy of U.S. 
President Barack Obama.  This marks 10 months since the launch of 
the Obama Administration, and four months since former U.S. 
President Bill Clinton visited North Korea.  Since sufficient time 
has passed for preparations for this dialogue, we are hoping for 
positive results. 
 
The U.S. and ROK governments say the agenda for the talks is to 
press for resuming Six-Party Talks and ensure the execution of the 
September 19, 2005 Joint Statement of the Fourth Round of the 
Six-Party Talks.  They have also drawn a line, saying this is not a 
"bilateral negotiation" as demanded by North Korea.  This claim 
(that it is not a bilateral negotiation) is reasonable since, if the 
U.S. and North Korea were to conduct give-and-take negotiations when 
North Korea has not clearly expressed its intention to return to the 
Six-Party Talks, it could obscure the future of the Six-Party Talks 
and the North Korea nuclear issue as a whole. 
 
This (U.S.-North Korea) dialogue should not end up being a mere 
venue to deliver the U.S.'s position.  The main reason why the 
Six-Party Talks have repeatedly stalled is that the two countries 
have different demands and different motivations for implementing 
their commitments.  This is backed by a deep-seated mutual distrust. 
  It would be difficult to hope for smooth progress, even if the 
Six-Party Talks restart, if basic trust cannot be secured at this 
time.  Accordingly, trust-building should be one of the big 
objectives of this dialogue. 
 
More than anything, Bosworth must convincingly present North Korea 
with what it could hope to gain.  Even if actual talks do not resume 
until later, only when the two sides are able to create a consensus 
about the big picture will it be likely that North Korea will decide 
to return to the Six-Party talks.  In addition, in regards to the 
related issues of signing a peace treaty and building a peace regime 
on the Korean Peninsula, as discussed recently by North Korea, we 
hope that these are not aimlessly delayed as some future task. 
Indeed, we hope, instead, that the U.S. presents its ideas and draws 
in North Korea's agreement. 
 
North Korea must know that now is the right time to return to the 
Six-Party Talks.  Ever since President Obama has pledged a "world 
without nuclear weapons," the will of participating nations to 
denuclearize is higher than ever.  The Obama Administration is also 
more open to negotiations on the North Korea nuclear issue than any 
previous U.S. administration.  Moreover, the international community 
will be watching what attitude North Korea adopts and deciding 
 
SEOUL 00001928  004 OF 005 
 
 
whether to continue with sanctions. 
 
Some quarters are predicting that following this dialogue the two 
sides will meet one more time and will raise the level of the 
bilateral talks.  Even if there ends up being such a need, the two 
sides must use this time to conduct conversations sufficient enough 
to draw out a framework.  Also, relevant nations, of course, 
including ours, must actively cooperate to ensure that the two 
countries' dialogue is productive. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
N. KOREA MEETS BOSWORTH; ITS ONLY CHOICE IS SIX-PARTY TALKS 
(JoongAng Ilbo, December 8, 2009, Page 38) 
 
U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth 
and his team will visit Pyongyang today in order to persuade the 
North to rejoin the Six-Party Talks, which were stalled last 
December, and to urge the communist state to fulfill its 
denuclearization promise.  Ahead of Ambassador Bosworth's visit to 
Pyongyang, however, the North is talking nonsense, stressing through 
The Choson Sinbo that a peace treaty between the U.S. and North 
Korea is the biggest pending issue.  As the ROKG is also concerned 
that the North may raise the issue of signing the U.S.-North Korea 
peace treaty, Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan recently proclaimed, "A 
peace treaty should be signed by the ROK and the North, with the 
U.S. and China participating as the parties to the armistice." 
Although this is the first time in a year that the nuclear issue 
will be discussed with North Korea) the related countries are 
engaging in an intensive war of nerves even before the start of 
dialogue. 
 
Discussions on the North Korean nuclear issue made progress on two 
occasions: the 1994 Geneva Agreed Framework between the U.S. and 
North Korea and the September 19, 2005, Joint Statement by the 
Six-Party Talks.  However, each agreement fell apart in the middle. 
In the meantime, North Korea staged two nuclear provocations, and 
the international community pressured the North by adopting the UN 
Security Council resolution sanctioning North Korea.  Now, the 
international community is calling on North Korea to return to the 
Six-Party Talks.  However, it is unclear whether Bosworth's visit to 
Pyongyang will pave the way for the North to rejoin the Six-Party 
Talks.  Even Ambassador Bosworth is not optimistic about the outcome 
of the bilateral talks, saying no one knows how North Korea will 
respond. 
 
We once again urge North Korea to express its intention to 
Ambassador Bosworth to return to the Six-Party Talks.  The Six-Party 
Talks already have a venue to discuss the issue of signing a peace 
treaty (on the Korean Peninsula) as requested by North Korea. 
Furthermore, the Six-Party Talks are prepared to offer North Korea 
massive economic aid and security assurances in return for its 
denuclearization.  These are stipulated by the September 19 Joint 
Statement. (Participants of the September 19 Joint Statement) 
include the U.S., Northeast Asia powers, such as Japan, China and 
Russia, and the ROK which has the greatest interest in the North's 
nuclear dismantlement.  The Six-Party Talks are the framework that 
can satisfy the North's demands if they are reasonable.  If North 
Korea truly intends to abandon its nuclear ambitions, there is no 
better place than the Six-Party Talks from which it can receive 
massive benefits. 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
U.S. SAYS IT IS REVIEWING KORUS FTA AND ROK CALLS FOR HASTENING ITS 
RATIFICATION 
(Korea Economic Daily, December 8, Page 4) 
 
By Reporter Yu Seung-ho 
 
 
SEOUL 00001928  005 OF 005 
 
 
Wendy Cutler, Assistant U.S. Trade Representative for Japan, Korea 
and APEC Affairs, said on December 7 that the U.S. is reviewing the 
Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA), adding that the USG 
will work together with the U.S. Congress and various interested 
parties to draw the broadest support for the deal.  She reaffirmed 
the U.S.'s previous position that it needs to renegotiate some parts 
of the deal, including auto clauses. 
 
Cutler participated in a forum discussing the change in world trade 
after the (economic) crisis which was hosted by the Korea 
International Trade Association and the U.S.-based Peterson 
Institute for International Economics.  She said that there has been 
an intense debate over the KORUS FTA since it was signed and that 
the Obama Administration has been reviewing the pact. 
 
Cutler noted that the U.S. is reviewing the KORUS FTA due to 
concerns raised by interested parties including the auto industry 
and the U.S. congress.  She said that U.S. and ROK leaders are 
greatly committed to ratifying the FTA.  Cutler emphasized that the 
U.S. intends to move the trade deal forward swiftly by discussing 
issues of concern with the ROK in a constructive and creative 
manner. 
 
Asked if a delay in the effectuation of the ROK-U.S. FTA is causing 
damage to U.S. companies, Assistant USTR Cutler answered, "Some 
industries are concerned," adding, "At least, we hope that the 
ROK-U.S. FTA will take effect around the same time as the ROK-EU 
FTA, so that U.S. companies will not be put at a disadvantage over 
European companies." 
 
In this regard, Lee Hye-min, the ROK's Deputy Minister for Trade and 
Chief FTA Negotiator, emphasized a need for an early ratification of 
the (ROK-U.S.) FTA without direct mention of renegotiating the pact. 
 He remarked, "Since the ROK-U.S. FTA will bring practical benefits 
for both nations, we should waste no time ratifying the deal." 
Saying, "I hope that the ROK-U.S. FTA and the ROK-EU FTA will be 
ratified almost at the same time," he explained, "The ROK's 
comprehensive FTAs can play a role in supplementing the World Trade 
Organization's efforts at multilateralism."  He went on to say, 
"Early next year, we plan to launch a feasibility study on an FTA 
between the ROK, China, and Japan." 
 
(Editor's note:  The same story was also carried by JoongAng Ilbo 
under the headline, "Assistant USTR: 'The USG Is Collecting Opinions 
of U.S. Auto Industry on KORUS FTA.'"  The article reports: 
"Regarding the ratification of the ROK-U.S. FTA, Assistant U.S. 
Trade Representative Wendy Cutler said on December 7, "The USG is 
currently collecting concerns and opinions of interest groups, 
including the auto industry," adding, "We will discuss with the ROK 
and move forward (on this issue) as quickly as possible."  She also 
noted, "We are reviewing whether there is any difference between the 
ROK-EU FTA and the ROK-U.S. FTA, and whether an earlier effective 
date for the ROK-EU FTA would have any impact on the U.S.") 
 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>