^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1591  |  2009-09-07  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 7일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001591

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[https://www.evernote.com/shard/s258/sh/db6e6414-2569-46ee-b0e5-9e1de06bd166/5f6cfa08c7455fc94fc1fbef91ae2443|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 7일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/02/04 13:54//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
＂일부 시민단체 수억씩 횡령＂;金감사원장 ＂국고보조금 빼돌린 의혹＂… 내주 수사 의뢰 

중앙일보
"산은 요구 거부 땐 GM 대출 회수"

동아일보
4∼9월 서머타임제 한일 공동실시 추진

한국일보
10여가지 범죄첩보 확보하고도 검, 효성수사 안했다

한겨레 신문
청와대 통신 3사 압박 250억 기금 요구

세계일보, 서울신문 모든 텔레비전
김정일 "조건부 6자회담 복귀"

===== 국내 동향 =====

유명환 외교통상부 장관은 6일 언론과의 세미나 석상에서 최근 북중 경제 협력 거래(경제원조에 관한 교환문서)가 유엔 안전보장이사회 대북제재 결의 위반일 수 있다며 우리는 "그런 점에 대해 중국 측에 관심을 표명한 바 있다"며 "중국의 설명이 있을 것으로 기대한다”고 덧붙였다. (동아)

지난달 화학무기 관련 물품을 적재했다는 혐의로 부산에서 압수된 4개의 북한 컨테이너의 행선지는 시리아라고 한국 정부 소식통은 전했다. ([[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01100401.20091007100009357|동아]])

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

김정일 북한 국방위원장은 5일 북한을 방문한 원자바오 중국 총리에게 “조-미(북-미)회담 결과를 보고 6자회담을 포함한 다자회담을 진행할 용의가 있다”고 말했다고 북한 조선중앙통신은 전했다. (전체)

한국과 미국 정보당국은 북한이 이달 (앞선 협정에 따라 불능화된) 영변 핵시설의 복구 작업을 끝내고 폐연료봉의 재처리 작업을 재개할 가능성이 크다고 보는 것으로 확인됐다고 한국 정부 소식통은 전했다. ([[http://news.donga.com/List/Series/3/all/20091007/8848171/1|동아]], 한국, 세계, 서울)

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

모든 언론은 북한 김정일 위원장이 원자바오 중국 총리와 함께한 10월 5일 회담 석상에서 조건부로 6자회담에 복귀할 가능성을 시사했다는 소식을 크게 다루었다. 김 위원장은 “조-미(북-미)회담 결과를 보고 6자회담을 포함한 다자회담을 진행할 용의가 있다”고 말했다고 알려졌다.

또한, 이언 켈리 국무부 대변인이 "한반도 비핵화를 위해서는 6자회담이 최선의 방안이다"라고 [[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01100401.20091007100009358|6자회담 과정에 대해 언급]]한 보도자료가 널리 인용되고 있다.

보수 동아일보는 청와대 관계자가 “북한이 6자회담 복귀 가능성을 시사한 것은 긍정적이지만 북-미 양자회담이라는 전제를 단 만큼 상황이 종전과 달라졌다고 말하기는 어렵다”고 설명했다고 전했다. 동아는 또 유명환 외교통상부 장관은 6일 언론과의 세미나 석상에서 최근 북중 경제 협력 거래(경제원조에 관한 교환문서)가 유엔 안전보장이사회 대북제재 결의 위반일 수 있다며 우리는 "그런 점에 대해 중국 측에 관심을 표명한 바 있다"며 "중국의 설명이 있을 것으로 기대한다”고 덧붙였다고 언급했다.

대다수 언론은 김 위원장의 6자회담 언급은 "진일보"한 발언이지만, 6자회담보다는 미·북 양자대화에 초점이 맞춰진 발언이라고 전했다. 특히 보수 조선일보는 김 위원장의 '6자회담 수용'이라는 말은 중국에 대한 '립서비스'일 뿐, 속 내용은 사실상 6자회담을 거부하고 미·북 양자대화에 전념하겠다는 의사 표시라고 했다. 조선일보는 김 위원장의 '조건부 복귀 발언'에 대해 [[http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/07/2009100700102.html|중국측은 당혹스러워]]하고 있다며 지난달 18일 다이빙궈(戴秉國) 국무위원이 방북했을 때에 김 위원장이 밝힌 "양자, 다자 대화에 나서겠다"는 태도에서 진전된 내용이 없기 때문이다고 덧붙였다.

신문은 다음과 같은 제하의 기사를 실었다: <＂조건부 6者 복귀＂… 달라진게 없는 김정일> (보수 조선일보); <“6자회담 영원히 없다”던 김정일 조건부 복귀로 2000만 달러 챙겨> ([[http://news.joins.com/article/3810193|중도 우파 중앙일보]]); <北, 6자회담 복귀 전제조건 제시한 듯> (보수 동아일보); <北.中 회담' 이후/체면 살린 中/북핵 중재자 역할 다시 한번 과시> (보수 세계 일보)

보수 조선일보 사설: "'다자회담에는 6자회담도 포함돼 있다'는 김 위원장의 말 역시 상황에 따라서는 북한이 6자회담 대신 북한이 선호하는 미국·북한·중국의 3자회담 카드를 들이밀 수도 있다는 복선(伏線)을 깔고 있는 발언이다. 결국 원자바오 중국 총리의 방북은 북한이 반드시 6자회담으로 복귀할 것이라는 약속이 아닌 다자회담 복귀 '용의 표명'만 받고 북한에 대규모 경제원조를 제공하기로 한 셈이다."

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설 주장: "…김정일 위원장은 이번 회담에서 핵 문제는 북·미대화에서 논의하고 6자회담은 이를 추인하는 방식을 생각하고 있음을 드러냈다. 이에 비해 미국은 핵 문제 해결방안 논의는 6자회담 틀 안에서만 가능하며 북·미대화는 6자회담을 위한 징검다리로 간주하고 있다. 이 같은 입장 차이가 어느 정도 해소돼야 미국의 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 평양 방문이 이뤄질 전망이다."

보수 동아일보 사설: "북이 선물 보따리를 받아들고 중국의 체면을 살려주기 위해 마음에 없는 ‘6자회담’을 언급했을 가능성이 크다. 중국의 지원이 북에 대한 국제적 제재 내용을 담은 유엔 결의 1874호에 위배되지 않는지 면밀히 따져봐야 한다. …중국이 대북 영향력을 유지하기 위해 유엔이 금지한 지원을 약속했다면 안보리 상임이사국 자격이 없다. 북은 중국의 태도를 보고 국제제재 전선에 균열이 생겼다고 판단해 핵 개발에 더 자신감을 가질 수도 있다."

중도 한국일보 사설: "어쨌든 공은 이제 북한에서 6자회담의 나머지 참가국들 쪽으로 넘어온 형국이다. …(미국은) 국제사회의 대북제재 공조의 틀을 유지하면서 확실한 6자회담 복귀를 이끌어내기 위해 신중을 기하겠지만, 완착으로 모처럼 조성된 기회를 놓쳐서는 안 될 것이다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[[http://chinese.joins.com/portal/article.do?method=print&total_id=3810077|[사설] 북·미대화 추인용 6자회담 안 된다]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 7일 42면)

북한 김정일 국방위원장이 5일 조건부로 6자회담을 할 수 있다고 언급했다. 원자바오(溫家寶) 중국 총리와의 회담에서 북·미회담 결과를 보고 6자회담을 진행할 용의를 표명했다는 것이다. 북한의 미사일 시험 발사를 비난하는 유엔 안전보장이사회 성명이 나오자 “6자회담은 영원히 끝났다”고 선언하고 여러 차례 강조했던 기존 입장에 비하면 한 발 진전된 입장이다. 6자회담 주최국이자 북한에 막대한 경제원조를 약속한 중국의 체면을 살려주려는 의도로 보인다. 경위야 어떻든 북한의 절대 권력자가 진전된 입장을 밝힌 것은 일단 환영할 일이다. 그러나 당장 6자회담이 재개되는 것도, 북한이 비핵화를 약속한 것도 아니어서 상황이 급반전한 것으로 평가할 순 없다. 당사자인 중국은 김정일-원자바오 회담 결과를 두고 “중대 공동 인식”이라거나 “적극적인 진전”으로 환영한 데 비해 한·미·일은 아직 신중한 반응을 보이는 이유다.

김정일 위원장 발언을 계기로 북·미 대화가 조금 더 가까워졌다고 할 수 있다. 그러나 북한과 미국 사이에 북·미 양자대화의 성격을 두고 여전히 상당한 인식 차이가 있는 것이 사실이다. 김정일 위원장은 이번 회담에서 핵 문제는 북·미대화에서 논의하고 6자회담은 이를 추인하는 방식을 생각하고 있음을 드러냈다. 이에 비해 미국은 핵 문제 해결방안 논의는 6자회담 틀 안에서만 가능하며 북·미대화는 6자회담을 위한 징검다리로 간주하고 있다. 이 같은 입장 차이가 어느 정도 해소돼야 미국의 스티븐 보즈워스 대북정책 특별대표의 평양 방문이 이뤄질 전망이다.

미 국무부는 회담 결과가 알려진 직후 “6자회담이 최선의 방안이라는 점에 (북한을 제외한) 5개국 사이에 의견이 일치돼 있다”는 공식입장을 밝혔다. 또 유엔 안보리의 대북 (제재) 결의의 완전한 이행에도 5자 의견이 일치돼 있다고 강조했다. 우리는 미 정부의 이런 입장이 앞으로도 계속 유지돼야 한다고 믿는다. 지난 20년 동안 북핵 문제 진행과정을 감안할 때 다른 방도가 없다는 생각이다. 김정일 위원장은 이번 회담에서도 한반도 비핵화가 김일성 주석의 유훈이라고 입버릇처럼 강조했지만 행동은 정반대였기 때문이다. 그의 말만을 믿고 섣불리 핵 문제가 해결될 것으로 기대할 수 없는 것이다. 따라서 ‘압박과 대화’라는 투 트랙 정책은 최소한 북한의 핵포기가 되돌릴 수 없는 상황에 도달했다는 확신이 설 때까지 유지해야 한다.

이명박 대통령은 9일과 10일 한·일, 한·중·일 정상회담을 앞두고 있다. 회담에서 북한의 진의를 파악하는 것은 물론 우리의 입장을 분명하게 개진할 필요가 있다. ‘그랜드 바긴’ 정책을 둘러싼 논란을 잠재우고 ‘6자회담 틀 안에서 핵 문제 해결’과 ‘북한의 태도 변화가 없는 한 안보리 제재 유지’라는 현재의 5자 간 합의가 앞으로도 잘 지켜질 수 있도록 노력해야 한다. 특히 북한과 양자대화를 앞둔 미국이나 북한과 특수 관계를 유지하는 중국과는 긴밀한 정책 협조가 있어야 한다.

[사설]중국, 북한 非核化더 멀어지게 하나(동아일보, 2009년 10월 7일, 35면)

중국이 북한의 조속한 6자회담 복귀 약속을 받아내는 데 실패했다. 김정일 국방위원장은 5일 원자바오 총리에게 “조-미(북-미) 회담 결과를 보고 6자회담을 포함한 다자회담을 진행할 용의가 있다”고 밝혔다. 김 위원장은 “북-미 관계는 양자회담을 통해 반드시 평화적인 관계로 전환돼야 한다”는 말도 했다. 6자회담을 언급하기는 했지만 북-미 관계가 그들의 뜻대로 돼야 참석하겠다는 뜻으로 읽힌다. 중국이 이 정도의 발언에 만족한다면 북핵 해결을 위한 6자회담 의장국이란 위상이 무색하다.

중국은 북에 상당한 경제지원을 약속한 것으로 알려졌다. 원 총리가 이끈 중국 대표단은 ‘경제원조에 관한 교환문서’를 비롯해 여러 개의 대북 협정과 합의문에 서명했다. 중국이 전액 부담하기로 한 압록강대교 건설비만도 1700억 원으로 추정된다. 북이 선물 보따리를 받아들고 중국의 체면을 살려주기 위해 마음에 없는 ‘6자회담’을 언급했을 가능성이 크다.

중국의 지원이 북에 대한 국제적 제재 내용을 담은 유엔 결의 1874호에 위배되지 않는지 면밀히 따져봐야 한다. 1874호 결의에는 ‘모든 회원국은 북한 주민에게 직접적으로 도움이 되는 인도주의 및 개발 목적이거나 비핵화를 증진시키는 용도를 제외하고는 북한에 새로운 공여나 금융지원, 양허성 차관(借款)을 제공하지 말 것을 촉구한다’는 내용이 들어 있다. 중국이 대북 영향력을 유지하기 위해 유엔이 금지한 지원을 약속했다면 안보리 상임이사국 자격이 없다. 북은 중국의 태도를 보고 국제제재 전선에 균열이 생겼다고 판단해 핵 개발에 더 자신감을 가질 수도 있다.

북이 미국과의 양자회담을 고집하는 이유를 중국도 잘 알 것이다. 북은 북-미가 만나 핵군축과 평화협정 체결, 주한미군 철수 문제를 논의해야 한다고 줄곧 주장해왔다. 이 주장이 먹힌다면 북은 핵보유국의 지위를 공인받는 셈이다. 그리고 6자회담은 열린다 하더라도 북-미 회담의 들러리 회담으로 전락하고 말 것이다.

북의 술책에 넘어가지 않으려면 국제사회가 단호하게 대응해야 한다. 미국 국무부는 북-중 회담 결과에 대해 “6자회담이 최선의 방안이라는 점에 (한미일중러) 5자 간에 의견이 일치돼 있다”는 반응을 보였다. 그나마 다행이다. 유명환 외교통상부 장관도 어제 “북핵문제는 6자회담에서 논의해야 한다”고 거듭 강조했다. 10일 베이징에서 한중일 정상회의가 열린다. 3국 정상이 북의 비핵화를 위한 공조에서 진일보한 결과를 창출하기를 기대하고 촉구한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

[사설] 6자회담 앞선 美北대화는 짧을수록 좋다(조선일보, 2009년 10월 7일 35면)

북한 김정일 국방위원장은 5일 원자바오(溫家寶) 중국 총리에게 "조미(朝美)회담 결과를 보고 다자회담을 진행할 용의"를 표명하면서 "다자회담에는 6자회담도 포함돼 있다"고 말했다. 북한이 제2차 핵실험 이후 유엔 안보리의 제재 결의에 반발하며 "6자회담에 되돌아가는 일은 결코 없을 것"이라고 해 왔던 입장을 최고지도자의 입을 통해 수정한 것이다.

그러나 김 위원장의 발언에는 북한 외교 특유의 전술적 함정과 함께 모호한 면이 적지 않다.

조미회담의 결과를 보고 다자회담을 진행하겠다는 대목이 그렇다. 북한의 계산은 미·북 양자회담에서 일정한 소득이 있어야만 6자회담 복귀 여부를 결정하겠다는 것이다. 그러나 미국은 미·북 양자 회담을 통해서는 북한에 대한 보상 약속이나 북핵의 실질적 논의를 가급적 피하겠다는 입장이다. 그렇다면 미·북 양자 회담에서 북한이 만족할 만한 소득을 챙기기 어려울 것이고, 6자회담 복귀는 다시 후일의 일로 밀려나게 된다. "다자회담에는 6자회담도 포함돼 있다"는 김 위원장의 말 역시 상황에 따라서는 북한이 6자회담 대신 북한이 선호하는 미국·북한·중국의 3자회담 카드를 들이밀 수도 있다는 복선(伏線)을 깔고 있는 발언이다.

결국 원자바오 중국 총리의 방북은 북한이 반드시 6자회담으로 복귀할 것이라는 약속이 아닌 다자회담 복귀 '용의 표명'만 받고 북한에 대규모 경제원조를 제공하기로 한 셈이다. 중국이 유엔 제재가 발효 중인 상황에서 이처럼 선(先)원조약속이라는 보상을 해 주는 것은 지난날 북한 다루기의 잘못을 또 되풀이하는 것이다. 이런 접근은 대북 제재의 국제협력 체제를 무너뜨리고 6자회담 참가국들의 대북 협상력을 크게 떨어뜨릴 우려가 크다.

김 위원장은 "조선반도 비핵화는 김일성 주석의 유훈(遺訓)이며, 그 목표를 실현하려는 우리의 노력은 변하지 않았다"고 했지만, 과거 북한은 이 이야기를 늘 입에 걸어두면서도 '조미 적대관계'를 핑계로 핵개발을 고수하겠다는 입장으로 돌아가곤 했다. 북한의 이런 자세는 앞으로 대화가 재개된다 해도 언제든지 전처럼 회담장을 떠날 가능성이 있음을 보여주는 동시에 협상 과정의 숱한 난관을 예고한다.

머지않아 이뤄질 미·북 대화에서 미국은 '포괄적 패키지'의 내용을 선보일 수는 있겠지만, 모든 구체적 협상은 6자회담으로 넘겨야 한다. 미북대화는 짧을수록 좋다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

[사설]북-중 합의로 한계 드러난 대북 압박정책 전환해야(한겨레신문, 2009년 10월 7일, 31면)

김정일 북한 국방위원장이 그제 원자바오 중국 총리를 만나 6자회담을 포함한 다자대화에 응할 준비가 돼 있다고 밝혔다. 

‘북-미 양자회담의 성과에 달려 있다’는 전제를 달긴 했지만, 북한 당국이 그동안 수차례 ‘사형선고’를 내린 6자회담을 김 위원장이 직접 언급한 것이다. 이는 북한이 대화노선으로 복귀하겠다는 신호로서, 북한 핵 문제에 대한 중대한 전기가 아닐 수 없다. 한반도 상황은 바야흐로 지난봄 북한의 인공위성 발사와 핵실험을 계기로 조성된 제재 국면에서 대화 국면으로 넘어가고 있음을 예고하는 것이다.

물론 대화 국면이 열려도 넘어야 할 산은 많다. 우선, 북한은 북핵 문제의 출발이 미국의 대북 적대정책에 있다는 점을 강조하며, 북-미 양자회담을 통해 실질적으로 문제를 해결하자는 자세를 굽히지 않을 가능성이 크다. 또 다자회담에 응하더라도 6자회담이냐, 북-미-중 3자냐, 남-북-미-중 4자냐를 놓고 관계국 사이에 줄다리기가 펼쳐질 수 있다. 북-미 회담이 어떤 성과를 올려야 북한이 다자회담에 복귀할 것인지도 미지수다. 그러나 어떤 경우라도, 한반도에서 긴장 대신 대화의 문이 열리게 된 것이니 다행스런 일이 아닐 수 없다.

이번 북-중 정상회담이 우리나라를 포함한 국제사회에 던지는 의미는 크게 두 가지다. 하나는 북한에 대한 중국의 대규모 경제원조 약속으로, 대북 제재가 사실상 효력을 잃었다는 것이다. 지난해 기준으로 북한 전체 무역의 70% 이상을 차지하고 있는 중국이 대규모 원조와 경제협력을 약속한 마당에, 제재를 통해 북한을 압박하자는 것은 말장난에 불과하다.

다른 하나는 두 나라가 우호관계를 ‘세세대대’로 이어가기로 한 점이다. 이는 중국이 북한의 체제를 장기적인 관점에서 보장하겠다는 것을 의미한다. 북한과 중국 사이에 ‘신밀월시대’가 도래했다고 할 만하다. 상황이 이렇게 된 데는 북한에 대한 압박 차원에서 남북 교류·협력을 철저하게 차단해온 이 정부의 탓도 크다.

중국의 정치·경제 지원을 확보한 북한은 앞으로 대남, 대미 관계에서 더욱 목소리를 높일 것이다.

그럼에도 우리 정부는 한계가 확실하게 드러난 국제공조를 통한 압박정책을 여전히 고수하겠다는 자세다. 지금이라도 늦지 않았다. 정부는 새로운 변화에 맞는 새로운 대북정책을 짜야 한다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01101101.20091006100002457|[사설] 6자회담 복원의 공을 떠넘긴 북한]]**(한국일보, 2009년 10월 7일, 39면)

북한 김정일 국방위원장이 북핵 6자회담에 조건부 복귀 의사를 밝혔다. 그는 그제 원자바오 중국 총리와의 회담에서 "북미회담 상황을 지켜보며 6자회담을 포함한 다자회담을 진행하길 원한다"고 말했다. 지난달 후진타오 중국 국가주석 특사 자격으로 방북한 다이빙궈 국무위원에게 6자회담에 대한 구체적 언급 없이 양자 및 다자회담 참여 의사만 밝힌 데 비하면 큰 진전이다. 이 달 하순께로 예상되는 스티븐 보즈워스 미국 대북정책 특별대표의 방북과 북미 양자회담 결과에 따라서는 6자회담 재개에 이어 북핵 논의가 급물살을 탈 가능성도 배제할 수 없다.

물론 김 위원장이 조건을 내건 점은 개운치 않다. 북한에 대해 영향력이 큰 중국의 체면을 세워주고, 국제사회의 제재 압박을 회피하면서 시간을 벌려는 의도라는 의심도 나올 만하다. 그러나 6자회담은 완전히 끝났다고 공언해온 북한이 단번에 6자회담 복귀를 선언하기는 힘들었을 터이고, 명분과 모양을 갖추는 과정이 필요했다고 볼 수 있다. 김정일-원자바오 회담에서 북핵 문제의 중요한 진전이 있었다는 중국 관변언론의 보도로 미뤄 북중 간에 보다 진전된 이면합의를 이루었을 것이라는 분석도 나온다.

어쨌든 공은 이제 북한에서 6자회담의 나머지 참가국들 쪽으로 넘어온 형국이다. 이미 북미 양자회담 개최 의사를 천명한 미국 오바마 행정부의 다음 한 수가 주목된다. 국제사회의 대북제재 공조의 틀을 유지하면서 확실한 6자회담 복귀를 이끌어내기 위해 신중을 기하겠지만, 완착으로 모처럼 조성된 기회를 놓쳐서는 안 될 것이다. 일본 등 나머지 참가국들도 6자회담 정상화를 위해 보다 적극적인 노력이 필요하다. 북한이 '다자회담'이라는 표현을 버리지 않는 것은 일본 등을 제외한 3자회담이나 4자회담으로 가겠다는 경고일 수도 있다.

우리 정부 역시 분발이 요구된다. 좀더 지켜보자는 신중함도 좋지만 급변 조짐을 보이는 정세에 뒤처질 우려도 있다. 다소 허황하다는 비판을 받고 있는 이명박 대통령의 '그랜드 바겐' 안에 실제적인 생명력을 불어넣기 위해서도 보다 적극적인 발상과 접근이 필요하다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 어두운 세상을 밝히려면 후원자의 소중한 손길이 절실합니다 =====
{{paypal>-----BEGIN PKCS7-----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-----END PKCS7-----}}
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1591.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 SEOUL 001591 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 7, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
NGOs Allegedly Embezzled Hundreds of Millions of Won 
in Government Subsidies 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Korea Development Bank May Withdraw Loans 
from GM Daewoo 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
ROK, Japan Mull Daylight Saving Time for Next Year 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Prosecutors Did Not Investigate Hyosung Group Even after Being 
Tipped Off about Its Illegal Activities 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Blue House Pressures Three Telecom Service Operators for KRW 25 
Billion in Donations 
 
Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
Kim Jong-il Signals "Conditional Return to Six-Party Talks" 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan, in an Oct. 6 seminar with the media, 
said that the latest North Korea-China economic cooperation deals 
may be in violation of the UN Security Council resolutions imposed 
on North Korea, adding: "We have expressed our interest in these 
matters and expect China to explain itself." (Dong-a) 
 
According to an ROKG source, the four North Korean containers seized 
in Busan last month for allegedly carrying items related to chemical 
weapons were headed for Syria. (Dong-a) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
According to North Korea's official Korean Central News Agency, 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il told visiting Chinese Premier Wen 
Jiabao on Oct. 5 that North Korea is "willing to participate in 
multilateral talks, including the Six-Party Talks, depending on the 
outcome of its talks with the U.S." (All) 
 
According to an ROKG source, ROK and U.S. intelligence authorities 
think that there is a high possibility that North Korea this month 
may complete restoring its Yongbyon nuclear facilities (disabled 
under previous accords) and resume reprocessing spent fuel rods. 
(Dong-a, Hankook, Segye, Seoul) 
 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
--------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
All media gave prominent play to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il's 
hint at the possibility of a conditional return to the Six-Party 
Talks during Oct. 5 talks with visiting Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao. 
The North Korean leader was widely quoted as saying: "Depending on 
the outcome of its talks with the U.S, North Korea is willing to 
participate in multilateral talks, including the Six-Party Talks." 
 
State Department Spokesman Ian Kelly was also widely quoted in 
statements he made about the Six-Party process, calling it "the best 
mechanism for achieving denuclearization" on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
SEOUL 00001591  002 OF 007 
 
 
 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo quoted a Blue House official as saying: 
"The North's hint at its possible return to the Six-Party Talks is 
positive, but we cannot say that the situation has changed since 
Pyongyang has suggested bilateral talks with Washington as a 
precondition."  Dong-a also noted Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan's 
remarks during a seminar yesterday, in which he said that the latest 
North Korea-China economic cooperation deals may be in violation of 
the UN Security Council resolutions imposed on North Korea, adding: 
"We have expressed our interest in these matters and expect China to 
explain itself." 
 
Most media described Kim's mention of the Six-Party Talks as 
"progress," but observed that the focus of Kim's latest remarks 
appears to be on bilateral talks with the U.S., rather than the 
Six-Party Talks.  In particular, conservative Chosun Ilbo commented 
that Kim's remarks are only "lip service" to China and constitute a 
de facto refusal by the North to participate in the Six-Party Talks 
and a clear expression that the North will instead concentrate on 
bilateral talks with the U.S.   Chosun went on to report that 
Chinese officials are apparently taken aback by the North Korean 
leader's statement because they see little it that signals progress 
over his expressed willingness to engage in "bilateral and 
multilateral talks," which was conveyed to Chinese State Councilor 
Dai Bingguo when he visited Pyongyang on Sept. 18. 
 
Newspapers carried the following headlines: "Conditional Return to 
Six-Party Talks... Kim Jong-il Remains Unchanged" (conservative 
Chosun Ilbo); "Kim Jong-il Pockets $20 Million in Aid from China in 
Return for Conditional Return to Six-Party Talks" (right-of-center 
JoongAng Ilbo); N. Korea Sets 'Traps of Conditions' to Return to 
Six-Party Talks" (conservative Dong-a Ilbo); and "China Saves Face, 
while N. Korea Wins Practical Benefits" (conservative Segye Ilbo) 
 
Conservative Chosun Ilbo editorialized: "North Korean leader Kim 
Jong-il's statement, 'That North Korea is ready to hold multilateral 
talks and these talks include the Six-Party Talks suggests that they 
may, depending on circumstances, push for trilateral talks between 
the U.S., North Korea and China, instead of the Six-Party Talks. 
After all, Chinese Premier Wen's visit to Pyongyang resulted in 
massive economic aid to North Korea in return for the North's mere 
"expression of willingness" to return to multilateral talks, instead 
of its clear promise to return to the Six-Party Talks.." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo's editorial argued: "... North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il's position reveals his belief that discussion on 
the nuclear issue should be between the U.S. and North Korea, and 
that the Six-Party Talks will confirm (whatever outcome results from 
those talks).  However, the U.S. believes that any discussions about 
the resolution of the nuclear issue must be within the framework of 
the Six-Party Talks and that U.S.-North Korea dialogue should serve 
as a stepping stone for the multilateral talks.  A visit to 
Pyongyang by U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy 
Stephen Bosworth is (more) likely to happen if this difference in 
position is narrowed to some degree." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo editorialized: "It is highly likely that 
the North mentioned the Six-Party Talks as a face-saving measure for 
China.  China's (economic) assistance may also violate U.N. Security 
Council Resolution 1874 sanctioning North Korea. ...  If Beijing 
promised assistance banned by the U.N. to maintain its influence 
over Pyongyang, it does not deserve a seat at the U.N. Security 
Council.  Rather, this could further encourage North Korea to 
develop nuclear weapons, judging that international sanctions 
against it might no longer be as strict as they used to be." 
 
Moderate Hankook Ilbo editorialized: "The ball is now in other 
Six-Party countries' court. ... The U.S. is likely to take cautious 
steps to make sure that North Korea will return to the Six-Party 
Talks while the international community continues to cooperate to 
enforce sanctions against North Korea.  The U.S., however, should 
not miss this rare opportunity by moving too slowly." 
 
 
SEOUL 00001591  003 OF 007 
 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
NO POINT IN SIX-PARTY TALKS IF THEY ONLY CONFIRM WHAT IS DISCUSSED 
IN U.S.-NORTH KOREA BILATERAL TALKS 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 7, 2009, Page 42) 
 
During North Korean leader Kim Jong Il's meeting with Chinese 
Premier Wen Jiabao on October 5, Kim reportedly expressed that, 
depending on the outcome of talks with the U.S., the North would be 
willing to conditionally rejoin the Six-Party Talks.  This is a step 
forward from his previous position that "the Six-Party Talks are 
gone forever."  The statement also appears to be a face-saving 
measure for China, which (evidently) promised the North massive 
economic aid.  Whatever the reason, (Kim Jong Il's hint at rejoining 
the Six-Party Talks) is a welcome advance in his position.  However, 
since the Six-Party Talks are not expected to resume soon, and the 
North did not (explicitly) promise to denuclearize, we cannot see 
this as a reversal of the current situation.  This is why the ROK, 
the U.S., and Japan are reacting cautiously while China welcomes the 
result of the Kim-Wen meeting, going so far as to say that it has 
helped them to reach an "important consensus" and bring about 
"active progress" in the pursuit of denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula. 
 
(The North's) statement may (still) facilitate U.S.-North Korea 
dialogue, however, despite there being a wide difference between the 
North and the U.S. over the perception of the nature of the 
bilateral talks.  Kim's position reveals his belief that discussion 
on the nuclear issue should be between the U.S. and North Korea, and 
that the Six-Party Talks will confirm (whatever outcome results from 
those talks).  However, the U.S. believes that any discussions about 
the resolution of the nuclear issue must be within the framework of 
the Six-Party Talks and that U.S.-North Korea dialogue should serve 
as a stepping stone for the multilateral talks.  A visit to 
Pyongyang by U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy 
Stephen Bosworth is (more) likely to happen if this difference in 
position is narrowed to some degree. 
 
Right after the outcome of the Kim-Wen meeting was disclosed, the 
U.S. Department of State released a statement concluding that the 
five parties (excluding the North) had agreed that "the Six-Party 
process (would serve as) the best mechanism (for resolving the 
nuclear issue)."  The State Department also stressed that the five 
parties had reached a consensus on the complete enforcement of the 
resolution of UN Security Council sanctions.  We believe that the 
USG should continue to maintain this stance.  Looking back to how 
the North Korean nuclear issue has unfolded over the past two 
decades, we think that there is no alternative (to the Six-Party 
Talks).  The reason for this is that, even though Kim Jong-il has 
maintained that the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was the 
dying wish of (his father,) North Korea's founder Kim Il-sung, the 
younger Kim's actions have not matched his words.  We cannot simply 
believe what he says and expect the nuclear issue to be resolved. 
The two-track approach of "pressure and dialogue" should be 
maintained until there is an assurance that North Korea abandons its 
nuclear (ambitions.). 
 
President Lee Myung-bak will attend the ROK-U.S. summit on October 9 
and the ROK-China-Japan summits on October 10.  During these 
summits, he should not only figure out North Korea's true intentions 
but also clearly state the ROK's position.  He should try to calm 
controversy over the "grand bargain" proposal and ensure that the 
five parties adhere to the agreements that "the nuclear issue should 
be resolved within the Six-Party framework" and "the UNSC sanctions 
should be maintained unless the North shows any change in its 
attitude."  In particular, the ROK should closely coordinate its 
(North Korean) policy with the U.S., which will have bilateral 
dialogue with the North, and China, which maintains a special 
relationship with the North. 
 
 
CHINA'S FAILURE TO DO MORE 
 
SEOUL 00001591  004 OF 007 
 
 
(Dong-a Ilbo, October 7, 2009, page 35) 
 
China has failed to persuade North Korea to return to the Six-Party 
Talks in the near future.  North Korean leader Kim Jong-Il told 
visiting Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao in Pyongyang Monday, "We are 
willing to go ahead with multilateral dialogue including the 
Six-Party Talks after looking at the outcome of bilateral talks with 
the U.S."  Kim added, "Our relationship with the U.S. must turn 
peaceful through bilateral talks."  By mentioning the Six-Party 
Talks, Kim apparently meant Pyongyang would return to them only if 
the North gets its way with Washington first.  If China is content 
with his comment, it does not deserve to be the host of the 
Six-Party Talks. 
 
Beijing is said to have promised substantial economic assistance to 
Pyongyang on the occasion of Wen's visit.  His delegation signed 
several agreements, including an "exchange document on economic 
assistance."  China will provide an estimated KRW 170 billion (USD 
145 million) for the construction of a bridge over the Yalu River. 
It is highly likely that the North mentioned the Six-Party Talks as 
a face-saving measure for China. 
 
China's (economic) assistance may also violate U.N. Security Council 
Resolution 1874 sanctioning North Korea.  The resolution requires 
all member states and international financial and credit 
institutions not to enter into new commitments of grants, financial 
assistance, or concessional loans with the North, except for 
humanitarian and developmental purposes that directly address the 
needs of the civilian population or denuclearization.  If Beijing 
promised assistance banned by the U.N. to maintain its influence 
over Pyongyang, it does not deserve a seat at the U.N. Security 
Council.  Rather, this could further encourage North Korea to 
develop nuclear weapons, judging that international sanctions 
against it might no longer be as strict as they used to be. 
 
China must clearly realize why North Korea insists on bilateral 
talks with the U.S. North Korea has long argued that the two 
countries must discuss nuclear disarmament in tandem with the 
signing of a peace treaty and withdrawal of U.S. forces from the 
ROK.  If this argument is accepted, this means that Pyongyang is 
recognized as a nuclear power.  Even if the Six-Party Talks are 
resumed, they will end up on the sidelines of North Korea-U.S. 
dialogue. 
 
The international community must not be duped by North Korea's 
tactics.  U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said of the North 
Korea-China talks that the five parties of the ROK, the U.S., Japan, 
China and Russia have all agreed that the Six-Party Talks are the 
best way to resolve North Korea's nuclear program.  This is a 
relief.  The ROK's Foreign Minister Yu Myung-hwan also said 
yesterday, "North Korea's nuclear issue must be discussed in the 
Six-Party Talks."  The ROK, China and Japan held a trilateral summit 
in Beijing Saturday.  The leaders of these three countries can and 
should advance coordination efforts for the denuclearization of 
North Korea. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
CHINA WEAKENS IMPACT OF PRESSURE ON N. KOREA 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 7, 2009, page 35) 
 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il told visiting Chinese Premier Wen 
Jiabao on Monday that his country is willing to attend multilateral 
talks, including the Six-Party Talks, depending on the progress in 
its talks with the United States.  It was a shift from the vow never 
to return to the Six-Party Talks which the North made in protest 
against UN sanctions following its second nuclear test. 
 
But Kim's comments contain strategic pitfalls and ambiguities that 
are trademarks of the Stalinist country's diplomatic style. 
 
A prime example is the caveat that the North's return to Six-Party 
 
SEOUL 00001591  005 OF 007 
 
 
Talks depends on progress in bilateral talks with Washington, which 
seems to imply it wants rewards first.  But the U.S. government 
wants to avoid promising rewards or discussing the specifics of 
North Korea's nuclear program during the meeting.  That would make 
it difficult for North Korea to walk away with rewards, and the 
Six-Party Talks could once again be postponed indefinitely.  That 
North Korea is ready to hold multilateral talks and these talks 
include the Six-Party Talks suggests that they may, depending on 
circumstances, push for trilateral talks between the U.S., North 
Korea and China, instead of the Six-Party Talks. 
 
After all, Chinese Premier Wen's visit to Pyongyang resulted in 
massive economic aid to North Korea in return for the North's mere 
"expression of willingness" to return to multilateral talks, instead 
of its clear promise to return to the Six-Party Talks.  In doing so, 
it is repeating the mistake of the past of rewarding North Korea 
before it has done anything, especially when UN sanctions are still 
in effect.  This approach weakens international pressure on North 
Korea and the negotiating powers of the countries in the Six-Party 
Talks. 
 
Kim repeated that denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula was the 
"last wish" of former leader Kim Il-sung and that Pyongyang would 
continue to achieve that wish.  But North Korea has used that line 
in the past, only to shift back to supporting its nuclear weapons 
program citing "hostile" policies by the ROK and the U.S.  Even if 
talks resume, this attitude shows that Pyongyang can quit again at 
any time, to say nothing of the trouble it can make during talks. 
 
In bilateral talks between North Korea and the U.S., Washington 
could give Pyongyang a hint of the contents of the "comprehensive 
package" the allies are promising, but specific details should be 
left for the Six-Party Talks. U.S.-North Korea talks must be kept as 
brief as possible. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
LEE ADMINISTRATION MUST CHANGE NOW-OBSOLETE N. KOREA POLICY 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, October 7, 2009, page 31) 
 
An important situational change in the North Korea nuclear issue has 
taken place over the past two days during the high-level meeting 
between North Korea and China. Meeting with Chinese Prime Minister 
Wen Jiabao two days ago, Kim Jong-il, Commissioner of North Korea's 
National Defense Commission said North Korea is prepared to accede 
to multilateral talks, including the Six-Party Talks, because there 
has been progress in discussions about holding bilateral North 
Korea-U.S. talks.. 
 
The return to Six-Party Talks is conditioned on the results of 
bilateral North Korea-U.S. talks, but Kim's direct reference to the 
Six-Party Talks, which North Korean authorities had declared dead on 
several occasions, seems to be a signal that North Korea will return 
to the path of dialogue.  The statement also indicates that the 
situation on the Korean Peninsula might move from sanctions that 
began with last spring's North Korean satellite launch and nuclear 
test towards dialogue. 
 
Of course, even if dialogue begins, there are many mountains to 
cross.  First, there is a high probability that North Korea will 
continue its push for bilateral talks, stressing that the starting 
point of the North Korean nuclear issue is U.S. hostile policy 
towards North Korea.  Moreover, even if North Korea agrees to 
multilateral talks, a tug-of-war will ensue between the relevant 
countries over whether the talks should be six-party, three-party 
(North Korea, U.S., China) or four-party (the ROK, North Korea, 
China, U.S.).  It is also unclear whether results from North 
Korea-U.S. bilateral talks will draw North Korea back as a 
participant in multilateral talks.  Despite these uncertain factors, 
it is fortunate that tensions on the Korean Peninsula have settled 
and the door for dialogue has opened. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001591  006 OF 007 
 
 
The significance of this meeting between China and North Korea for 
the international community, including the ROK, is twofold, broadly 
speaking.  First, with China agreeing to large-scale economic aid to 
North Korea, sanctions against North Korea have been rendered 
virtually powerless.  With China, which accounted for over 70 
percent of North Korean trade last year, pledging large-scale 
economic cooperation, pressuring North Korea through sanctions is 
nothing more than a joke. 
 
The other point of significance is that the two nations have pledged 
to strengthen their friendship "for generations to come."  This 
means China will support the North Korean regime in the long-term. 
One could say a honeymoon era between North Korea and China has 
begun.  The Lee Myung-bak Administration is greatly at fault for 
letting the situation reach this point, because (the Administration) 
thoroughly blocked exchanges and cooperation with North Korea. 
 
Having secured Chinese political and economic support, North Korea's 
will become more insistent in its demands with the ROK and the U.S.. 
 Our government, however, says it will stick to pressuring North 
Korea through international cooperation, the limit of which was 
clearly displayed here.  It is not too late.  It is time for the Lee 
Administration to craft a new North Korea policy in line with the 
new changes. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
N. KOREA THROWS BALL FOR SIX-PARTY TALKS INTO OTHER COUNTRIES' COURT 
 
(Hankook Ilbo, October 7, 2009, page 39) 
 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il expressed a conditional willingness 
to return to the Six-Party Talks.  During talks with Chinese Premier 
Wen Jiabao, Kim said, "North Korea is willing to participate in 
multilateral talks, including the Six-Party Talks, depending on the 
outcome of its talks with the U.S."  This seems to be a considerable 
jump in progress from last month's meeting between Kim Jong-il and 
Chinese State Councilor Dai Bingguo, who was visiting Pyongyang as a 
Chinese presidential envoy.  (During the meeting,) Kim said that the 
North would be willing to participate in bilateral and multilateral 
talks, but did not (specifically) mention the Six-Party Talks. 
There is even a probability that, depending on the outcome of 
U.S.-North Korea bilateral talks, discussions on the North Korean 
nuclear issue may progress more rapidly following the resumption of 
the Six-Party Talks. (According to sources,) U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen Bosworth is expected 
to visit North Korea late this month. 
 
Still, Kim Jong-il's intentions are dubious because he attached 
conditions (to a return to the Six-Party Talks.)  This has led to 
suspicion that while his statement may have been a face-saving 
measure for China, the North intends to bide its time while avoiding 
international sanctions and pressure.  It would be difficult for 
North Korea, which declared the Six-Party Talks dead (months ago), 
to issue a sudden announcement that it will return to the Six-Party 
Talks.  Therefore it seems that Pyongyang needed time to find a 
justification (for its return to the Six-Party Talks.)  Some 
analysts believe that North Korea and China must have made 
behind-the-scenes deals considering Chinese state media's report 
that there was significant progress on the North Korean nuclear 
issue during the Kim-Wen meeting. 
 
The ball is now in other Six-Party countries' court.  Attention is 
turning to what next move the Obama Administration, which has 
expressed its interest in holding bilateral talks with the North, 
will make.  The U.S. is likely to take cautious steps to make sure 
that North Korea will return to the Six-Party Talks while the 
international community continues to cooperate to enforce sanctions 
against North Korea.  The U.S., however, should not miss this rare 
opportunity by moving too slowly.  Other Six-Party countries such as 
Japan should undertake more efforts to put the Six-Party Talks back 
on track.  North Korea stuck to the expression of "multilateral 
 
SEOUL 00001591  007 OF 007 
 
 
talks" apparently to warn of the possibility of engaging in 
three-party or four-party talks excluding Japan. 
 
The ROKG also should step up efforts (to resume the Six-Party 
Talks.)  Our wait-and-see approach may leave us sidelined amid signs 
of a drastic change in developments (surrounding the Korean 
Peninsula.)  The ROKG needs to take a more active approach to make 
President Lee's "grand bargain" proposal a practical and tangible 
concept since it has been criticized for being somewhat far-fetched. 
 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>