^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1676  |  2009-10-22  |  미분류  |  주한미국대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 22일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001676

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=83670&sc_code=2037454745&page=59&total=2313|서울 언론보도; 2009년 10월 22일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/04/05 07:28//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
정상회담, 정부는 아니라지만… 南과 北, 뭔가 움직인다 

중앙일보
교장 94% "교사,학부모 평가 받겠다"

동아일보
中선양 한국총영사관서 보호하던 국군포로가족 2명 민박집 머물다 또 강제북송

한국일보
교과위 의원 86% "외고 폐지에 찬성"

한겨레 신문
4대강 준설토 처리 "지자체가 비용대라"

세계일보
'불법낙태' 병원 공개한다

서울신문
나라살림 공개 '미적미적'
===== 국내 동향 =====

로버츠 국방장관은 22일 한국 상대역과 함께할 연례 한미 안보협의회 참석차 21일 서울에 도착하였다. (전체) 한미 양국은 ‘확장억지(extended deterrence)’ 개념에 따른 한국 방위 수단을 명문화할 것으로 알려졌다. (조선, 동아, 한국, 세계, 서울)

로버츠 국방장관은 한미 양국 군 복무자들과 함께한 회동에서 "한국의 국제적 군사 기여는 있는 그대로 자국의 안보와 사활적(vital) 국익이 되는 것으로 이해되어야 한다"고 말했다. (전체)

정부 관계자들은 정상회담을 서두를 이유가 없다고 말하지만, 남북 간에 '뭔가 진행되고 있다'는 징후들이 있다. 첫째, 현재 남북관계 전반과 정상회담 준비 등을 위한 태스크포스(TF)가 꾸려져 있다. 둘째, 최근 방중(訪中)한 김양건 통일전선부장이 원동연 아태평화위 실장을 데리고 갔다. 셋째, 남한 정부가 남북 간 군(軍) 통신선 현대화 공사를 위해 북측에 8억5000만원 상당의 자재·장비를 지원할 계획이다. (조선)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

힐러리 클린턴 국무부 장관은 10월 21일 미국평화연구소 연설에서 북한이 되돌릴 수 없는 비핵화 조치를 하지 않을 경우 대북 제재 해제하거나 관계를 정상화하는 일은 없을 거라고 말했다.

===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

보수 동아일보와 모든 TV 방송국은 10월 21일 미국평화연구소에 있었던 힐러리 클린턴 국무부 장관의 연설에 관심을 보였다. 그녀는 연설 중에 북한이 되돌릴 수 없는 비핵화 조치를 하지 않을 경우 미국이 대북 제재 해제하거나 관계를 정상화하는 일은 없을 거라고 말했다.

==== 게이츠 국방장관의 서울 방문 ====

한국의 모든 언론은 로버츠 국방장관은 22일 한국 상대역과 함께할 연례 한미 안보협의회 참석차 21일 서울에 도착하였다는 소식을 보도했다. 언론 보도로는 한미 양국이 핵무기를 포함한 북한의 군사위협에 대응하기 위해 핵우산과 재래식 타격능력, 미사일방어 등 모든 범위의 ‘확장억지(extended deterrence)’ 개념에 따른 한국 방위 수단을 명문화할 것으로 알려졌다.

대다수 언론 보도는 로버츠 국방장관이 한미 양국 군 복무자들과 함께한 회동 석상 발언을 부각하였다. 그는 그 자리에서 "한국의 국제적 군사 기여는 있는 그대로 자국의 안보와 사활적(vital) 국익이 되는 것으로 이해되어야 한다"고 말했다. 대다수 언론은 이 발언을 한국의 아프가니스탄 파병을 염두에 둔 발언으로 보았다. 중도 우파 중앙일보는 <게이츠, 아프간 얘기는 안 꺼냈지만 … 결국 파병 요청? 간접적이지만 강한 어조>란 제하의 기사를 작성하였다.

===== 특집 =====

**[[http://gangnam.joins.com/news/article/Article.aspx?total_id=3836655&sc=&mc=|게이츠, 아프간 얘기는 안 꺼냈지만 … 결국 파병 요청?]]**(중앙일보, 2009년 10월 22일, 3면)

김민석 군사전문기자

게이츠 미 국방부 장관의 용산 기지 연설 탐구

간접적이지만 강한 어조 … 미군 장병 위로 내용 아닌 한국군 역할 강조

파격적이었다. 로버트 게이츠 미 국방장관이 21일 서울 용산기지에서 미군 장병을 대상으로 한 연설은 과거 미 국방장관의 연설 스타일과는 사뭇 달랐다. 그의 연설은 고향에서 멀리 떠나 근무하는 주한미군 장병을 위로하는 내용이 아니었다. 한국군의 역할 확대에 대한 주문이 상당 부분을 차지했다.

게이츠 장관은 한국의 아프가니스탄 파병 문제를 직접 언급하지는 않았다. 간접적이었지만 강한 표현을 썼다. 이라크와 베트남에 대한 파병을 언급하면서 한국의 국제적인 군사적 공헌이 한국의 안보와 사활적 국가 이익에 도움이 된다고 했다. 한·미 동맹이나 미국을 위한 게 아니라 한국의 국제적 위상을 위한 것이라는 설명이다. 이명박 정부가 내세우는 ‘글로벌 코리아’를 실현하기 위해서는 국제사회에 그만한 기여를 자발적으로 해야 한다는 점을 강조하는 듯하다.

게이츠 장관의 어법은 과거 한국군의 이라크 파병 과정에서 빚어진 혼선을 염두에 둔 것으로 보인다. 미국은 2003년 한국에 이라크 파병을 요청했지만 한국은 2년 후에야 자이툰 부대를 보낼 수 있었다. 당시 파병을 둘러싼 한·미 동맹 기여론은 국내에서 역풍을 맞았다. 말도 많았고, 탈도 많았다.

그가 한국군의 지역적·글로벌 차원의 역할을 언급한 것도 주목거리다. 그는 “한국의 새롭고도 전문화된 평화유지(PKO) 부대 발표는 환영받고 있다”고 말했다. 한국군이 한반도를 넘어 동북아와 세계적 차원에서도 적극적인 역할을 해 주기를 바란다는 메시지를 함께 던진 것이다. 그러면서 한국의 정치 지도자들에게 방위에 대한 투자를 강조했다. 이 또한 이례적이다.

대신 게이츠 장관은 북한의 핵 위협에 대해 확고한 억제력을 제공하겠다고 약속했다. 그는 “북한은 핵 확보와 핵 기술 및 탄도미사일 확산을 추구하고 있다”며 “한반도는 물론 환태평양과 나아가 세계를 불안하게 만든다”고 지적했다. 그 대처 방안으로 핵우산과 통상적인 타격력, 미사일 방어능력 등 세 가지를 제시했다.

게이츠 장관은 전시작전통제권(전작권)의 2012년 전환 문제에 대해선 예정대로 이행하겠다는 뜻을 내비쳤다. 전작권 전환은 “(한국군이) 보다 더 책임을 맡는 쪽으로 가는 변화의 결정판”이라며 “이런 변화는 미국의 역할이 한국의 보호자에서 완전한 파트너로 발전되는 것의 반영”이라고 잘라 말했다. 게이츠 장관은 한·미가 앞으로 협조할 안보 분야로 ▶비확산 ▶탄도미사일 방어 ▶일본을 포함한 (동북아) 지역안보협력 등을 꼽았다.

**[[http://news.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/10/22/2009102200105.html|정상회담, 정부는 아니라지만… 南과 北, 뭔가 움직인다]]**(조선일보, 2009년 10월 22일, 1, 2면: 발췌)

안용현 임민혁 기자

…정부 고위소식통은 21일 "북한이 지금 남북정상회담을 원하는 것은 맞다"면서도 구체적인 내용에 대해선 "노 코멘트"라고 했다.

김정일 북한 국방위원장이 이명박 대통령을 초청했다는 미 국방부 차관보의 브리핑을 청와대와 백악관 모두 "오해"라고 했지만

남북 간에 '뭔가 진행되고 있다'는 징후들이 곳곳에서 포착되고 있다. 김양건 통일전선부장이 (10월 15~20일 사이) 원동연 아태평화위 실장을 데리고 간 것이 예사롭지 않다"고 지적한다. 

원 실장은 2007년 남북 정상선언의 초안을 작성한 북측 실무자이고 그해 총리회담 합의문도 그의 손을 거쳤다. 원 실장은 2007년 남북 정상선언의 초안을 작성한 북측 실무자이고 그해 총리회담 합의문도 그의 손을 거쳤다. 지난 20년간 굵직한 남북 회담의 막후에서 활약했다.

김용현 동국대 교수는 "대남 정책을 총괄하는 김 부장이 원 실장을 대동한 것은 남북관계와 관련된 모종의 임무가 있었을 것이라는 추측을 가능케 하는 일"이라고 했다.

남북 현안에 밝은 정부 소식통도 이날 "현재 남북관계 전반과 정상회담 준비 등을 위한 태스크포스(TF)가 꾸려져 있다"며 "여기에는 정부뿐 아니라 일부 민간 인사들도 참여하고 있는 것으로 안다"고 했다. …현재 국가정보원·통일부·외교부 등은 뒤에서 지원만 하는 상황이라고 이 소식통은 덧붙였다.

그러나 청와대 등 정부 공식라인은 남북 접촉설(說) 등에 대해 한결같이 "모른다"고 했다. (또는 어느 정부 당국자도 그런 회동에 참석한 바 없다고 말한다.)

…한편 정부가 이날 "남북 간 육로 통행에 필수적인 일"이라며 남북 간 군(軍) 통신선 현대화 공사를 위해 북측에 8억5000만원 상당의 자재·장비를 지원키로 했다고 밝힌 것도 최근 남북 대화 기류와 관련해 주목받고 있다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1676.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 001676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; October 22, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Although ROKG Denies Negotiating Inter-Korean Summit with N. Korea, 
Something Seems to be Afoot between Two Koreas 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
94 Percent of Principals Surveyed Willing to Receive Evaluations 
from Teachers and Parents 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Two Family Members of an ROK Prisoner of War, 
who had been under Protection of ROK Consul General in Shenyang, 
China, after Fleeing 
N. Korea, Forcibly Repatriated to the North 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
86 Percent of Lawmakers 
on National Assembly's Education and Science Committee Favor 
Abolishing Foreign Language High Schools 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Land Ministry Seeks to Shift Part of Costs of Four-River Restoration 
Project onto Local Governments 
 
Segye Ilbo 
List of Hospitals Performing Illegal Abortions to be Released 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
ROKG "Reluctant" to Disclose Details of 
Next Year's Budget Plan 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates arrived in Seoul yesterday for 
the annual Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) today with his ROK 
counterpart. (All) The two countries are expected to put in writing 
measures to defend the ROK under the concept of "extended 
deterrence." (Chosun, Dong-a, Hankook, Segye, Seoul) 
 
The Defense Secretary said during a meeting with U.S. and ROK 
service members: "Korea's international military contributions 
should be seen as what they are - something that is done to benefit 
your own security and vital interests." (All) 
 
There are signs that something is going on between the two Koreas, 
although ROKG officials say that there is no need to rush an 
inter-Korean summit. First of all, the ROKG has formed a task force 
to deal with inter-Korean relations and to prepare for an 
inter-Korean summit. Second, when Kim Yang-gon, Director of the 
United Front Department at the North's Workers' Party, recently 
visited China, Won Dong-yon, an expert on the ROK, accompanied him. 
Third, Seoul plans to provide North Korea with optical cables and 
other equipment worth 900 million won to modernize an inter-Korean 
military communication line. (Chosun) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in an Oct. 21speech at the U.S. 
Institute of Peace, said that the U.S. will not lift sanctions on 
North Korea nor normalize ties unless the North takes irreversible 
steps toward denuclearization. (Dong-a, all TVs) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
 
SEOUL 00001676  002 OF 004 
 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo and all TV networks gave attention to 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's Oct. 21 speech at the U.S. 
Institute of Peace, in which she said that the U.S. will not lift 
sanctions on North Korea nor normalize ties unless the North takes 
irreversible steps toward denuclearization. 
 
U.S. Defense Secretary Gates' Visit to Seoul 
All ROK media covered Defense Secretary Robert Gates' arrival in 
Seoul yesterday for the annual Security Consultative Meeting (SCM) 
today with his ROK counterpart.  According to media reports, the two 
countries are expected to put in writing measures to defend the ROK 
under the concept of "extended deterrence, " which uses the full 
range of American military might - from the nuclear umbrella to 
conventional strike and missile defense capabilities. 
 
Most coverage highlighted the Defense Secretary's remarks during a 
meeting with U.S. and ROK service members, in which he said: 
"Korea's international military contributions should be seen as what 
they are - something that is done to benefit your own security and 
vital interests."  Most media viewed this remark as intended for the 
ROK's deployment of troops to Afghanistan.  Right-of-center JoongAng 
Ilbo wrote in the headline: "Gates Did Not Raise Afghan Issue, but 
Tone of His Speech was Indirect but Strong; Isn't It a Roundabout 
Way of Requesting Troop Dispatch?" 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
GATES DID NOT RAISE AFGHAN ISSUE, BUT TONE OF HIS SPEECH WAS 
INDIRECT BUT STRONG; ISN'T IT A ROUNDABOUT WAY OF REQUESTING TROOP 
DISPATCH?" 
(JoongAng Ilbo, October 22, 2009, Page 3) 
 
By Military Affairs Reporter Kim Min-seok 
 
A close look at U.S. Defense Secretary Gates' speech at Yongsan 
Military Base 
 
Indirect but strong tone... He emphasized the role of ROK troops, 
rather than boosting the morale of U.S. servicemen. 
 
It was unprecedented.  The speech that U.S. Defense Secretary Robert 
Gates gave to U.S. servicemen at Yongsan military base on October 21 
was starkly different from his previous ones.  His speech was not 
designed to cheer up U.S. soldiers, who are serving in a country far 
away from their hometowns.  It was mainly about a call for the 
expansion of the role of the ROK military. 
 
Secretary Gates did not directly mention the ROK's troop dispatch to 
Afghanistan.  He used indirect but strong words.  While talking 
about (Seoul's) troop deployments to Iraq and Vietnam, he said that 
the ROK's international military contributions are beneficial to the 
country's security and vital interests.  In other words, Seoul's 
military contributions are not for the sake of the U.S. or the 
ROK-U.S. alliance but for the ROK's global stature.  He seemed to 
stress that in order to achieve the Lee Myung-bak Administration's 
"Global Korea" plan, the ROK should make a voluntary contribution to 
the international community. 
 
Judging from his language, Secretary Gates appeared to be mindful of 
a previous discord over the ROK's troop dispatch to Iraq.  In 2003, 
the U.S. requested the ROK to send troops to Iraq, but it was not 
until two years later that the ROK was able to deploy the Zaytun 
Unit to the region.  At that time, the argument that the ROK's troop 
dispatch would contribute to the ROK-U.S. alliance backfired in the 
ROK.  It stirred up a lot of controversy. 
 
It is also notable that he mentioned the role of ROK troops at a 
regional and global level.  He said, "The recent announcement of a 
new, specialized peacekeeping unit in the ROK military is especially 
welcome."  Secretary Gates went on to say that future ROK forces 
 
SEOUL 00001676  003 OF 004 
 
 
"will be not just more capable of defending the Korean Peninsula, 
but be a contributor to regional and global security as well."  In 
an unusual remark, he also stressed that ROK political leaders 
should make an investment in defense. 
 
Secretary Gates pledged to provide extended deterrence against North 
Korea's nuclear threat.  Gates said that North Korea is pursuing 
nuclear weapons while engaging in proliferation of nuclear 
technology and ballistic missiles.  He added that the peril posed by 
North Korea has become destabilizing not only to the Korean 
Peninsula but also to the Pacific Rim and the world.  The defense 
secretary noted that the U.S. is committed to deter the North's 
threat through the nuclear umbrella, and conventional strike and 
missile defense capabilities. 
 
Secretary Gates hinted that the transfer of the wartime operational 
control of ROK troops from Washington to Seoul will take place as 
planned in 2012.  He said that the plan is "the culmination of a 
series of shifts toward greater responsibility," adding that "these 
shifts have reflected the evolution of the U.S. role - from 
protector of (the ROK) to the role of a full partner."  Gates noted 
that the U.S. and the ROK should cooperate in the future on security 
issues such as non-proliferation, ballistic missile defense and 
(Northeast Asia) regional security cooperation including Japan. 
 
 
2 KOREAS 'PREPARING FOR SUMMIT' 
(Chosun Ilbo, October 22, 2009, pages 1, 2: Excerpts) 
 
By Reporters Ahn Yong-hyun and Lim Min-hyuk 
 
A senior government source on Wednesday admitted that North Korea 
"now wants an inter-Korean summit."  But when asked about details, 
he added, "No comment." 
 
When an assistant U.S. defense secretary last week told reporters 
that North Korean leader Kim Jong-il invited President Lee Myung-bak 
to a summit, both Cheong Wa Dae and the White House denied it.  But 
something seems to be afoot. 
 
There is speculation about behind-the-scenes meetings between the 
two Koreas.  Kim Yang-gon, the director of the North Korean Workers 
Party's United Front Department, took Won Dong-yon, a ranking member 
of the Asia-Pacific Peace Committee, along on a visit to China on 
Oct. 15-20, which was uncommon. 
 
Won was among working-level officials who drafted the declaration 
after the second inter-Korean summit in 2007.  He also drafted an 
agreement signed by the prime ministers of the two Koreas that year 
and has worked behind the scenes of major inter-Korean talks over 
the past 20 years. 
 
Prof. Kim Yong-hyun of Dongguk University said, "The fact that Kim 
Yang-gon, the North Korean official in charge of ROK affairs, was 
accompanied by Won suggests that Won was given some duties connected 
with inter-Korean relations." 
 
A government official familiar with inter-Korean affairs said a 
taskforce has been launched to deal with entire inter-Korean 
relations and prepare for an inter-Korean summit, apparently 
consisting of civilians as well as government officials.  Another 
source said the National Intelligence Service, the Unification 
Ministry and the Foreign Ministry are giving support to the 
taskforce. 
 
Yet government agencies including Cheong Wa Dae have unanimously 
denied rumors about behind-the-scenes inter-Korean meetings, or have 
said that no government officials have attended such meetings. 
 
Meanwhile, the government Wednesday said it will give materials and 
equipment worth W850 million (US$1=W1,179) to North Korea for the 
modernization of inter-Korean military communication cables, calling 
it "essential" for overland passage between the two Koreas. 
 
 
SEOUL 00001676  004 OF 004 
 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>