^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL1554  |  2009-09-28 08:43  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도: 2009년 9월 28일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 06 서울 001554

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도: 2009년 9월 28일
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2015/03/20 11:16//

===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
전교조 내부도 “교원평가 필요”

중앙일보, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 텔레비전
휴대전화 요금 11월부터 내린다, 가게 부담 매년 7~8%로 경감

동아일보
남 “이산상봉 중단 없어야” 북 “남도 호의에 화답해야”

한국일보
일하는 빈곤층 반년새 14만명

한겨레 신문
국민 10명중 6명 “정운찬, 총리 부적합”
===== 국내 동향 =====

외교 소식통에 의하면 하토야마 유키오 일본 총리는 10월 9일 방한하여 이명박 대통령과 정상 회담을 할 예정이다. 하토야마의 방한은 10월 10일 베이징 한중일 정상회담을 하루 앞두고 이뤄지는 것이다. (모든 신문)

유종하 한국 적십자사 총리는 어제 북측 상대역이 이산가족 상봉 지속을 대가로 쌀과 비료를 한국에 간접적으로 요청했다고 어제 말했다.((http://www.chosun.com/site/data/html_dir/2009/09/27/2009092700632.html)) (모든 신문)
==== 국제 뉴스 ====

제임스 스타인버그 국무부 부장관은 9월 27일 하와이에서 기자 회견을 하였다. 그는 그 자리에서 미국은 북한 핵 무장 해제와 관련 6자회담 당사자들이 북한이 6자회담 복귀하도록 "통일된" 메시지를 보내길 원한다고 말했다. (세계일보, 엠비씨)

베이징 외교 소식통에 의하면 중국 원자바오 총리는 북중 양국 사이 외교 수립 60주년을 기념하여 10월 4일부터 이틀 간 북한을 방문할 예정이다. 원자바오 총리가 북한 지도자 김정일과 회동해 북한의 조속한 6자회담 복귀를 설득할 가능성이 매우 높다. (중앙일보, 한국일보)
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 북한 ====

보수 세계일보와 공영방송 MBC는 제임스 스타인버그 국무부 부장관의 9월 27일 하와이 기자 회견 내용을 보도하였다. 두 매체는 제임스 부장관이 미국은 북한 핵 무장 해제와 관련 6자회담 당사자들이 북한이 6자회담에 복귀하도록 "통일된" 메시지를 보내길 원한다는 발언을 했다고 인용하였다.

토요일 언론사는 대부분 미국과 북한이 양자 회담의 세부 사항을 최종 정리하기 위해 한두 달 이상이 필요할 수 있다는 한국 고위 관리의 말을 인용하였다. 해당 고위 관리의 발언이 추가로 인용되었다: "아직 시기나 형식이 정해지지 않았다. 미국은 북한에 잘못된 메시지를 주지 않기 위해 신중하게 접근할 것이다."(([[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01100201.20090925100005992|“북·미 양자대화 시기 늦어질 듯”… 정부 당국자 밝혀]] //국민일보//))

중도 우파 중앙일보는 토요일 사설에서 "유엔 안전보장이사회가 24일 핵무기 확산 근절 결의 1887호를 만장일치로 채택했다. ... 전 세계적인 비핵화 노력이 강조돼온 것은 하루 이틀의 일이 아니다. 그러나 이번 결의는 반기문 유엔 사무총장의 지적대로 “새로운 세상을 향해 새롭게 출발하는 역사적 순간”이라는 의미를 갖고 있다. 오바마 미 대통령은 “국제법은 공허한 약속이 아니며 조약은 반드시 집행돼야 한다”고 강조해 북한과 이란의 핵보유 야망에 강력히 대처할 것을 천명했다.
==== G20 정상 회담 마무리 ====

내년 11월 한국이 개최하는 G20 정상회담에 대한 보도가 오늘과 주말에 걸쳐 대서특필되었다.

이명박 대통령은 토요일 7일 간의 방미를 마치고 귀국하던 토요일에 이렇게 말했다고 널리 인용되고 있다: "G20 정상회의 개최를 선진국 진입의 좋은 계기로 만들어야 한다. (G20 정상회의 개최는) 우리나라가 (정치, 경제, 시민의식, 법치 등에서) 세계 외교의 중심에 설 뿐 아니라 국격을 업그레이드할 수 있는 계기가 될 것입니다."((http://www.yonhapnews.co.kr/bulletin/2009/09/27/0200000000AKR20090927042000001.HTML))

언론 보도에 의하면 부유한 20개 선진국이 제3회 피츠버그 G20 정상회담에서 그간 세계 경제를 지배했던 선진국 포럼인 G8을 거의 대체하는 등 국제 경제 협력을 위한 첫 포럼으로 G20을 추인하기로 합의하였다.

중도 우파 중앙일보는 오늘자 사설에서 이렇게 썼다. "지난해 벌어진 금융위기는 신흥경제권을 제외한 G8만으로는 세계적인 경제위기에 제대로 대처할 수 없음을 여실히 보여줬다. ... 이제 세계경제의 중심축이 G8에서 G20으로 옮겨가는 것은 기정사실이 되었다. ... 그러나 G20 체제의 장래는 아직 불투명하다. 사안마다 선진국과 신흥경제국 간의 입장 차이가 여전히 큰 가운데 20개국에 이르는 다양한 국가 간에 의사소통이 원활하게 이루어질 수 있을지도 미지수다. ... 이런 점에서 내년 11월 한국에서 열리는 회의가 G20 체제의 안정적인 발전 여부를 가르는 결정적인 분수령이 될 공산이 크다.
===== 사설 =====

**[[http://chinese.joins.com/portal/article.do?method=detail&total_id=3796890|G20 연례 정상회의, 세계경제 발전 초석 돼야(중앙일보, 9월 28일 46면)]]**

미국 피츠버그에서 열린 제3차 G20(주요 20개국) 정상회의는 정상 선언문에서 이 회의를 2011년부터 연례적으로 개최하겠다고 밝혔다. G20 정상회의를 금융위기에 대응하기 위해 급조한 부정기적인 임시 회의체에서 명실상부한 세계 경제의 상설 최고협의기구로 격상시키겠다는 것이다. 백악관은 이에 대해 “G20 정상들이 G20 정상회의를 전 세계 최고위 경제협의체(the premier forum)로 만드는 역사적 합의를 도출했다”고 평가했다. 바야흐로 세계경제 질서가 강대국 중심의 G8 체제에서 선진국과 신흥경제권을 아우르는 G20 체제로 전환되고 있음을 공식적으로 확인한 셈이다.

실제로 G20 체제로의 이행을 보여주는 구체적인 증거가 이번 정상회의에서 합의한 선언문 곳곳에서 발견된다. 세계경제의 양대 기구인 국제통화기금(IMF)과 세계은행(IBRD)의 지분율과 투표권의 일부를 선진국에서 신흥국으로 이전키로 했다. 특히 선진국들끼리 나눠 가지던 국제기구의 대표와 고위직도 능력에 따라 선출해 임명키로 합의했다. 그만큼 우리나라를 포함한 신흥경제권의 목소리가 국제경제 무대에서 커지게 된 것이다.

사실 이 같은 움직임은 국제적으로 높아진 신흥경제권의 위상을 세계적인 금융위기를 계기로 뒤늦게나마 반영한 것이라고 볼 수 있다. 금융위기 이전에도 신흥경제국들은 빠른 경제성장을 통해 이미 세계경제의 중심세력으로 부상했기 때문이다. 이들을 제쳐놓고 G8만 모여 세계경제를 논한다는 것 자체가 실효성을 상실했다. 지난해 벌어진 금융위기는 신흥경제권을 제외한 G8만으로는 세계적인 경제위기에 제대로 대처할 수 없음을 여실히 보여줬다. 지난해 12월 부랴부랴 미국 워싱턴에서 처음 소집된 G20 정상회의는 이 같은 세계경제의 구조 변화를 반영한 역사적 귀결이었던 셈이다.

이제 세계경제의 중심축이 G8에서 G20으로 옮겨가는 것은 기정사실이 되었다. 이번 피츠버그 G20 정상회의가 우리에게 중요한 것은 단순히 우리나라가 내년에 이 회의의 개최지로 선정되었기 때문만은 아니다. G20 정상회의가 세계경제의 최고 의사결정기구로 부상했고, 바로 그 역사적인 전환을 주도적으로 이끌 수 있는 기회가 한국에 주어졌다는 의미가 더 크다.

그러나 G20 체제의 장래는 아직 불투명하다. 사안마다 선진국과 신흥경제국 간의 입장 차이가 여전히 큰 가운데 20개국에 이르는 다양한 국가 간에 의사소통이 원활하게 이루어질 수 있을지도 미지수다. 자칫하면 국가 간 이해다툼의 각축장이 되거나, 원론적인 선언 이외에 아무런 구체적 결정을 도출하지 못하는 기능부전의 정상 모임에 그칠 우려도 있다. 이런 점에서 내년 11월 한국에서 열리는 회의가 G20 체제의 안정적인 발전 여부를 가르는 결정적인 분수령이 될 공산이 크다. 여기서 한국이 선진국과 신흥국 사이에서 중재자와 조정자로서의 역할을 다해야 한다. 전 세계가 주최국 한국의 역량에 주목하는 이유다.

**[[http://japanese.donga.com/srv/k2srv.php3?biid=2009092832298|G2O 정상회의 주최, 선진화 가속 기회 삼아야(동아일보, 2009년 9월 28일, 31면)]]**

우리나라가 내년 11월 아시아에서는 최초로 주요20개국(G20) 정상회의를 개최하게 됐다. 이로써 한국은 미국(2회) 영국 캐나다에 이어 5번째이자 아시아 최초의 G20 정상회의 주최국이 된다. 세계 230여 나라 가운데 글로벌 현안을 논의하고 결정하는 G20에 들어간 것만도 대한민국의 성취를 입증하는 것인데, 회의 유치 성공은 외교사에 남을 쾌거로, 국가 위상 제고의 결정적 기회를 잡은 것이다.

이명박 대통령은 작년 11월 워싱턴에서 열린 G20 1차 회의에서 돌아온 직후 회의 유치 의지를 밝혔고 이에 따라 태스크포스가 즉시 가동됐다. (그동안 G8이 세계 정치경제 질서를 주도했지만 8개국의 힘만으로는 지구촌 현안들을 해결하는데 한계가 있었다. 경제위기뿐 아니라 기후변화, 핵 확산, 테러 등 글로벌 난제들이 등장하면서 새로운 국제적 리더십이 필요한 시기에 G20이 태동했다.)((역주: 미 대사관 번역에서 생략된 원본 한글 기사 부분을 대괄호로 묶었다)) 이 대통령의 정상 네트워크가 힘을 발휘했고 사공일 G20 기획조정위원장을 비롯한 정부 관계자들이 주요국을 돌며 공을 들인 것이 결실을 맺었다.

그동안 G8이 세계 정치경제 질서를 주도했지만 8개국의 힘만으로는 지구촌 현안들을 해결하는데 한계가 있었다. 경제위기뿐 아니라 기후변화, 핵 확산, 테러 등 글로벌 난제들이 등장하면서 새로운 국제적 리더십이 필요한 시기에 G20이 태동했다. G20은 전 세계 총생산의 85% 이상을 차지한다. 지구촌 문제에서 G8의 역할은 점점 줄어들 것으로 예상된다. 피츠버그에서 정상들은 G20 회의를 세계 최고 경제협의체(프리미어 포럼)로 만들자고 합의한 만큼 경제 분야에서는 G8을 대체할 가능성이 크다.

G20 한국회의에서는 경제위기 출구전략, 금융규제, 국제통화기금(IMF)과 세계은행 개혁 등이 주요 의제로 등장할 것으로 전망된다. 우리가 개최국으로서 의제 선정과 결론 도출 과정에서 주도적 역할을 하고, 회의를 성공적으로 치러내면 포스트 G8의 한 주역으로 위상을 높일 수 있을 것이다.

선진국과 신흥국 및 개도국은 글로벌 경제 불균형 해소 방안, 금융위기 극복 방안을 놓고 이견을 드러내고 있다. 한국은 선진국 진입을 앞두고 있고 성공적인 개발도상국과 경제신흥국 경험을 갖고 있어 중간자적 중재 역할을 하기에 적합하다.
G20 정상회의 개최를 우리의 정치 경제 사회 전반의 국격을 선진국 수준으로 높이는 계기로 삼아야 한다. 세계경제포럼(WEF)의 세계 국가경쟁력 순위에서 한국은 19위를 기록했다. 특히 노사협력 등 노동 부문 경쟁력은 세계 최하위권이다. 금융시장 성숙도, 은행 건전성 등의 순위도 G20 회의 개최국으로서는 부끄러운 수준이다.

G20 회의 주최까지 1년여 동안 대의민주주의 복원을 비롯한 정치문화 선진화에서도 국민과 세계가 인정할 성과를 내야 한다. 그렇지 않으면 G20 회의를 개최하는 민주주의 후진국의 불명예를 덮어쓸 우려도 없지 않다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://www.hani.co.kr/arti/opinion/editorial/379003.html|G20 정상회의, 실질 협력체제로 나아가야(한겨레 신문, 2009년 9월 28일, 27면)]]**

지난 주말 미국 피츠버그에서 막을 내린 제3차 주요 20개국(G20) 정상회의가 G20을 전세계 최고경제협의체로 만든다는 데 합의하고 2011년부터는 정상회의를 연례화하기로 했다. 국제사회가 선진국 중심의 G8만으론 세계경제 문제를 풀 수 없다는 사실을 인정하고, 중국 등 신흥공업국과 개발도상국을 포함한 G20이 G8을 대체하게 될 것임을 확인한 것이다. 세계경제에서 G20이 차지하는 비중이 85%나 되고 개도국의 비중 역시 절반에 육박한 점을 고려하면, 이는 세계경제 질서가 민주화의 도정에 들어섰음을 보여주는 중요한 결정이다.

이번 정상회의는 그밖에도 ‘지속가능한 균형성장을 위한 협력체제’를 구축할 수 있도록 각국 정책에 대한 상호 평가를 도입하고, 2011년까지 국제통화기금과 세계은행의 지분구조를 개편하며 금융기관 규제를 강화하기로 합의했다. 또 세계경제의 개방 기조를 재확인하고 위기를 이유로 보호주의로 후퇴해선 안 된다는 원칙도 천명했다.

그러나 문제는 이들 합의의 상당 부분이 구체성이 없을 뿐 아니라 강제력을 확보하지 못한 점이다. 국제 경제 질서의 민주화와 직결된 국제통화기금과 세계은행의 지분구조 개선만 해도 그렇다. 중국 등은 이번 회의에서 이들 국제기구의 지분 문제를 해결할 것을 촉구했지만, 정상선언문은 통화기금 지분의 5%와 세계은행 지분의 3%를 과다보유 국가에서 과소보유 국가로 이전하는 방안을 지지한다는 정도로 마무리했다. 세계경제 위기를 낳은 금융기관의 방만한 운영을 규제하는 방안으로 양질의 자본 확충의 필요성을 확인하면서도 그 구체적 수준에 대한 국제적 기준 마련도 2012년으로 미뤄졌다.

이런 상황은 어떤 의미에선 예견 가능한 일이었다. 참여국이 늘고 참여국의 편차도 G8보다 훨씬 크기 때문에 실질적 문제에 대한 합의는 그만큼 어려울 수밖에 없다.

그렇다 하더라도 G20이 세계 최고의 경제협의체가 되려면 단순히 합의를 위한 합의에 만족해서는 안 된다. 세계경제 위기의 근원이 됐던 문제를 피하지 않고 해결하려는 용기가 필요하다. 그런 점에서 연례화에 앞서 정상회의를 주최하기로 한 한국을 위시한 신흥국들의 역할과 노력이 중요하다. 단순히 신흥국의 이해관계를 넘어 이 회의에 대표되지 못한 빈국들의 의사를 대변함으로써 국제 경제 질서를 민주화할 수 있기 때문이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://article.joins.com/news/article/article.asp?total_id=3795070&ctg=|안보리 비핵화 결의 … 북한 살 길은 핵포기뿐(중앙일보, 2009년 9월 26일, 34면)]]**

유엔 안전보장이사회가 24일 핵무기 확산 근절 결의 1887호를 만장일치로 채택했다. 오바마 미국 대통령을 비롯해 중국·러시아·프랑스·영국 등 15개 안보리 회원국 정상들이 참석해 채택한 결의는 핵무기·핵물질의 확산 방지와 핵실험 금지를 위한 유엔 회원국의 노력을 촉구하고 핵확산금지조약(NPT) 강화를 천명하는 내용이다. 특히 핵물질과 핵 관련 장비를 제공받은 국가가 NPT를 준수하지 않거나 탈퇴하면 핵물질과 장비를 판매한 국가가 그것을 수거할 수 있도록 규정하고 있다. 그 밖에 모든 나라가 포괄적핵실험금지조약(CTBT)에 서명, 비준할 것을 요구했다. 이로써 ‘핵 없는 세상’ 구현을 위한 국제적인 큰 그림이 그려졌다. 이번 결의에 북한과 이란이 직접 거명되지는 않았으나 회의에서 각국 정상들은 두 나라를 ‘안전한 세상의 장애물’로 지목했다.

전 세계적인 비핵화 노력이 강조돼온 것은 하루 이틀의 일이 아니다. 그러나 이번 결의는 반기문 유엔 사무총장의 지적대로 “새로운 세상을 향해 새롭게 출발하는 역사적 순간”이라는 의미를 갖고 있다. 오바마 미 대통령은 “국제법은 공허한 약속이 아니며 조약은 반드시 집행돼야 한다”고 강조해 북한과 이란의 핵보유 야망에 강력히 대처할 것을 천명했다. 이번 결의 채택을 계기로 내년 4월의 NPT 강화 정상회의에서 새로운 국제협약이 마련될 전망이다.

북한은 이번 안보리 결의 채택의 의미를 특히 주목해야 한다. 갈수록 강화되는 국제사회의 결연한 핵무기 반대 의지를 고려할 때 핵을 앞세운 ‘선군(先軍)정치’는 오래 지탱하기 어렵다. 핵을 끌어안고 북한이 살 수 있는 길은 없다. 국제사회로부터의 고립은 갈수록 심해질 것이며, 결국 수십 만 명이 아사한 ‘고난의 행군’을 되풀이할 수밖에 없게 된다. 지금 국제사회는 북한의 핵포기 결단을 촉구하며 체제보장과 경제지원을 약속하고 있다. 그런 약속을 보장하는 틀이 바로 6자회담이다. 하루속히 6자회담에 복귀할 것을 촉구한다. ‘핵 선군’의 앞날은 멸망일 뿐이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[[http://news.donga.com/3/all/20090926/8814216/1|北, 안보리 反核결의 진지하게 받아들이라(동아일보 2009년 9월 26일(미대사관 28일로 오기), 31면)]]**

유엔 안전보장이사회가 그제 핵 확산 차단과 핵군축을 강화하는 결의 1887호를 만장일치로 채택했다. 버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 주재한 회의에는 중국 러시아 영국 프랑스를 비롯한 15개국 정상이 참석했다. 유엔 안보리 회원국 정상들이 지구촌을 핵의 위협에서 구하기 위해 반핵(反核)의 선봉에 나선 것이다. 반기문 유엔 사무총장은 ‘역사적인 날’이라고 의미를 부여했다. 결의에 북한과 이란이 거명되지는 않았지만 주요국 정상들은 두 나라가 목표임을 분명히 했다. 오바마 대통령은 유엔총회 연설에서 “북한과 이란의 핵 프로그램이 국제사회를 위험한 비탈로 끌어내리려 위협하고 있다”며 “책임을 져야 할 것”이라고 경고했다. 니콜라 사르코지 프랑스 대통령은 결의가 채택된 뒤 “평양 정권은 1993년 이후 20년 가까이 핵과 미사일을 개발하고, 민감한 기술을 외국에 수출하고 있다”며 “모든 유엔 회원국이 안보리 결의에 따라 북한의 불법 무기와 핵 수출을 감시하고 압류해야 한다”고 촉구했다.

국제사회의 핵 비확산 의지는 어느 때보다 강하다. 오바마 대통령은 4월 ‘핵무기 없는 세계’를 주창한 이후 의욕적으로 반핵 행보를 계속하고 있다. 그는 내년 3월 핵보유국 정상회의와 5월 핵확산금지조약(NPT) 평가회의를 주재한다. 안보리 특별정상회의가 5년 만에 개최된 것도 회원국들이 북한과 이란의 핵위협을 심각하게 판단했기 때문이다.

러시아도 미국의 반핵 노력에 동참하고 있다. 오바마 대통령과 드미트리 메드베데프 러시아 대통령은 23일 정상회담에서 이란이 핵문제 종식을 위한 국제사회의 제안에 응하지 않을 경우 심각한 추가 제재를 검토하기로 합의했다. 미-러 정상은 올해 만료되는 전략무기감축협정(START-1)을 대체할 새로운 협정도 마련하기로 약속했다.

안보리 정상들의 반핵 결의는 차관급이 참석하는 북핵 6자회담의 합의보다 더 무거운 의미를 담고 있다. 정상들의 결의는 대북(對北)제재 결의 1718호, 1874호를 준수하겠다는 다짐이기도 하다. 안보리는 ‘핵물질과 핵 관련 장비를 제공받은 국가가 NPT를 준수하지 않거나 탈퇴하면 이를 판매한 국가가 관련 핵물질과 장비를 회수할 수 있다’는 내용까지 결의에 담았다. 북한이 이런 경고를 계속 무시하면 결국에는 체제 불안이 가중되는 궁지로 몰릴 수밖에 없다. 
스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 바깥 고리 =====
<WRAP center round info 90%>//**미국의 이해관계와 한국의 이해관계를 구분하는 법**//
미 대사관이 국무부 타전을 목적으로 작성한 본 뉴스 브리핑은 한국 뉴스를 다루고 있지만, 같은 날 똑같은 한국 뉴스를 브리핑한 기사를 읽어보면 겹치는 뉴스가 하나도 없음을 알고 나서 경악을 금치 못했다. 분명히 한국 뉴스인데 한국의 관심사(세종시)와 미국의 관심사(G20, 6자회담)가 전혀 겹치지 않는다는 사실은 시사하는 바가 크다. 백문이 불여일견이다. [[http://www.newswire.co.kr/newsRead.php?no=431308&ected=| 9월 28일 주요일간지 일일 모니터 브리핑]] //민언련//의 브리핑과 [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=83133|아침뉴스 솎아보기 ]] //미디어오늘//의 브리핑 중 하나를 읽어 보고 본 미국 대사관 브리핑과 비교해 보면 뭔 소리인지 알게 될 것이다. 한국인 종미주의자와 미국인 종미주의자는 양립할 수 없다. 본 미 대사관의 뉴스 브리핑의 시각과 동일한 시각으로 현상을 바라보는 한국인 종미주의자가 존재한다면 그건 매국노의 또 다른 이름일 뿐이다. 착각하지 마시라. 친미와 종미는 다르다. 미국을 좋아할 수는 있어도 제대로 알고 좋아하기는 힘들며 심지어 추종하기는 매국노가 아니라면 거의 불가능하다. 
</WRAP>

===== 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1554.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 001554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; September 28, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
Progressive Teachers' Group Acknowledges Need 
for Teacher Evaluation 
 
JoongAng Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun, All TVs 
Mobile Phone Rates to be Cut Starting in November, 
Helping Households Save 7 to 8 Percent Annually 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Separated Families Hold Reunions 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Number of "Working Poor" Jumps by 140,000 in First Half 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Survey: Six out of 10 Citizens Think 
Prime Minister Nominee "Unfit for Office" 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to diplomatic sources, Japanese Prime Minister Yukio 
Hatoyama will visit Seoul on Oct. 9 for a summit with President Lee 
Myung-bak. His visit comes on the eve of the Oct. 10 trilateral 
summit in Beijing between the leaders of the ROK, China and Japan. 
(All) 
 
The ROK's Red Cross Chief Yoo Chong-ha said yesterday that his North 
Korean counterpart presented an indirect request for ROK rice and 
fertilizer aid in return for ongoing reunions of separated families. 
(All) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg, during a Sept. 27 press 
briefing in Hanoi, said that the U.S. wants its partners in the 
Six-Party Talks on North Korea's nuclear disarmament to send 
Pyongyang a "unified" message to return to the talks. (Segye, MBC) 
 
According to a diplomatic source in Beijing, China's Premier Wen 
Jiabao will visit North Korea for two days from Oct. 4 to mark the 
60th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the two countries. There 
is a high possibility that the Chinese premier may meet with North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-il to persuade the North to promptly return 
to the Six-Party Talks. (JoongAng, Hankook) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
-N. Korea 
--------- 
Conservative Segye Ilbo and MBC, a public broadcaster, quoted Deputy 
Secretary of State James Steinberg as saying during a Sept. 27 press 
briefing in Hanoi that the U.S. wants its partners in the Six-Party 
Talks on North Korea's nuclear disarmament to send Pyongyang a 
"unified" message to return to the talks. 
 
Most media on Saturday quoted a senior ROKG official as saying that 
the U.S. and North Korea may need more than a month or two to 
finalize the details of a bilateral meeting.  The official was 
further quoted: "The timing and format have not yet been set.  The 
U.S. will take a careful approach so as to not give the North a 
wrong signal." 
 
 
SEOUL 00001554  002 OF 006 
 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized on Saturday: "The UN 
Security Council has unanimously passed a new resolution, No. 1887, 
aimed at stopping the spread of nuclear weapons. ...  It is not news 
that international efforts for denuclearization have been emphasized 
and highlighted.  However, as UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said, 
this was 'a historic moment, a moment offering a fresh start toward 
a new future.'  President Obama stressed that 'international law is 
not an empty promise, and treaties will be enforced.'  By doing so, 
Obama hinted at his intentions to deal firmly with the nuclear 
ambitions of North Korea and Iran." 
 
-G20 Summit Wrap-Up 
-------------------- 
The ROK's hosting of the Group of 20 Summit in November next year 
received prominent press coverage today and over the weekend. 
 
President Lee Myung-bak was widely quoted as saying on Saturday upon 
his return from his seven-day trip to the U.S.: "Hosting the G-20 
summit gives Korea momentum as the nation continues efforts to 
elevate itself to the status of a developed country.  It will not 
only help Korea stand at the center of diplomacy but also upgrade 
Korea's national stature in terms of politics, economy, legal system 
and civility." 
 
According to media reports, the leaders of the Group of 20 rich and 
developing countries agreed during the third G-20 summit in 
Pittsburgh to endorse the G-20 as the premier forum for 
international economic cooperation, largely replacing the G-8, a 
forum for industrialized nations that has long dominated the world 
economy. 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized today: "Last year's 
financial crisis clearly demonstrated that the G-8 countries alone, 
without the emerging economies, cannot deal with global economic 
crises properly.  ... Now it has become an established fact that the 
'central axis' of the world economy has shifted from the G-8 to the 
G-20.  ... However, the prospects of the G-20 system are still 
unclear.  It is doubtful whether various countries can communicate 
without difficulty since there are big differences of opinion 
between developed countries and emerging economies on every issue. 
... In this sense, the G-20 Summit, which will take place in the ROK 
next November, is highly likely to become a watershed in determining 
the stable development of the G-20 system." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
-------------------- 
 
G-20 SUMMIT SHOULD BECOME THE CORNERSTONE OF WORLD ECONOMIC GROWTH 
(JoongAng Ilbo, September 28, 2009, page 46) 
 
Leaders of the third G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh said in a statement 
that they will hold the meeting annually starting from 2011.  It 
seems that the leaders intend to upgrade the G-20 Summit from a 
temporary irregular meeting for combating the global financial 
crisis to a permanent premier coordinating body.  The White House 
said that the G-20 leaders reached a historic consensus to designate 
the G-20 as the world's premier forum for international economic 
cooperation.  This indicates that the leaders officially confirmed a 
new world economic order, in which the G-8 is being replaced by the 
G-20 involving both developed countries and emerging economies. 
 
In fact, the statement provides some concrete evidence that 
indicates that the G-20 system is being implemented.  The G-20 
called for a shift from developed to developing countries in the 
proportion of equity share and voting rights in the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) and International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (IBRD).  In particular, the leaders agreed that the head 
of the international organizations should be selected based on 
qualifications, not nationality.  This shows that emerging economies 
including the ROK have a growing voice on the international economic 
stage. 
 
This reflects, even if belatedly, the increased status of emerging 
 
SEOUL 00001554  003 OF 006 
 
 
economies in the aftermath of the global financial upheaval.  Even 
before the financial crisis, emerging economies had played a key 
role in the global economy by achieving fast economic growth. 
Therefore, it was meaningless for only the G-8 Summit leaders, 
excluding these emerging economies, to discuss the global economy. 
Last year's financial crisis clearly demonstrated that the G-8 
countries alone, without the emerging economies, cannot deal with 
global economic crises properly.    It seems natural that the G-20 
Summit, which was hastily convened in Washington last December, has 
taken hold as a premier coordinating body by reflecting a change in 
the structure of the world economy. 
 
Now it has become an established fact that the 'central axis' of the 
world economy has shifted from the G-8 to the G-20.  The Pittsburgh 
G-20 Summit is important in that the ROK was chosen to host next 
year's meeting.  What carries greater significance is that the G-20 
Summit emerged as the premier decision-making body of the global 
economy, and the ROK was given an opportunity to take the leadership 
role in the historic shift. 
 
However, the prospects for the G-20 system are still unclear.  It is 
doubtful whether various countries can communicate without 
difficulty since there are big differences of opinion between 
developed countries and emerging economies on every issue.  The G-20 
Summit may end up being "an arena of struggle" or a "dysfunctional" 
summit which issues only a statement without reaching any concrete 
decision.  In this sense, the G-20 Summit, which will take place in 
the ROK next November, is highly likely to become a watershed in 
determining the stable development of the G-20 system.  The ROK 
should serve as a mediator between developed countries and emerging 
economies.  This is why the entire world is paying attention to 
whether the ROK will exert its capability as a host country. 
 
 
G20 SUMMIT SHOULD EXPEDITE NAT'L DEVELOPMENT 
(Dong-a Ilbo, September 28, 2009, Page 31) 
 
Korea will be the first Asian country to host the Group of 20 summit 
in November next year and the fourth country to do so among G20 
member states after the U.S. (twice), Britain and Canada.  Korea's 
participation in the summit in and of itself attests to the nation's 
great strides in the international community.  Seoul's successful 
bid to host the event is also a great achievement in Korean 
diplomacy.  The country has also secured a monumental opportunity to 
raise its international profile. 
 
President Lee Myung-bak expressed his will to host the G20 summit 
soon after his return from the first event in Washington in November 
last year.  A government task force was formed to bid for the 
hosting rights immediately.  His "personal network of G20 leaders" 
added momentum to Korea's bid, and government officials including 
former Finance Minister Sakong Il, Chairman of the G20 planning and 
coordination committee, visited major member countries to propagate 
Korea's successful bid. 
 
The Group of Eight economies had previously dominated the global 
economy but failed to effectively tackle all pending global issues. 
The G20 was formed at a time when the world required new leadership 
in the wake of global challenges, including climate change, nuclear 
proliferation and terrorism.  The G20 accounts for 85 percent of 
global production, so the G8 will likely see its role in the global 
agenda gradually decline.  G20 leaders in Pittsburgh last week 
agreed to make the G20 the world's leading forum, and so chances are 
high the G20 will replace the G8 in the economic area. 
 
The G20 summit in Korea will likely cover key agenda items such as a 
strategy to overcome the economic crisis, financial regulations, and 
reform of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.  If 
Korea can play a leading role in setting the agenda and generating 
solutions as the host country in successfully hosting next year's 
event, it can raise its global profile as a key member of the 
"post-G8" alliance. 
 
Advanced and emerging economies and developing nations have shown 
 
SEOUL 00001554  004 OF 006 
 
 
differing views on easing the disparity in the global economy and 
overcoming the financial crisis. Korea is poised to join the league 
of advanced economies, and has ample experience as a successful 
developing country and emerging market.  As such, the country is 
indeed qualified to play the role of a bridge between developed and 
developing economies. 
 
Korea must use the G20 summit as an opportunity to increase its 
national image to the level of advanced countries across the 
spectrum, encompassing politics, economy and society.  The country 
was ranked 19th this year in national competitiveness by the World 
Economic Forum.  Notably, the country is "rock bottom" in terms of 
labor competitiveness, including labor-management cooperation, and 
lags behind financial market sophistication and soundness of banks, 
a shameful level for a country that will host the G20 summit. 
 
Korea needs notable achievements recognized by both the Korean 
public and the world in advancing the nation's political culture, 
including making Korea's democracy more representative by the time 
of the next G20 summit.  Otherwise, Korea could face disgrace as an 
"underdeveloped democracy" that hosts the G20 summit. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
G-20 AS DEMOCRATIC GLOBAL ECONOMIC COORDINATOR 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, September 28, 2009, Page 27) 
 
The nations meeting at the G-20 summit, which closed last weekend in 
the U.S. city of Pittsburgh, have agreed to turn the G-20 into the 
world's top economic forum and to regularize G-20 summits starting 
in 2011.  This agreement is being interpreted as an acknowledgement 
that the international community cannot resolve the economic 
problems of the world with just the leadership of the G-8 alone, 
which is centered on the advanced countries.  In addition, it is 
being seen as a confirmation that the G-20 summit, which includes 
newly industrialized developing countries, such as China, will 
replace the G-8 summits.  When one considers that the G-20 accounts 
for some 85 percent of the global economy and over half of the total 
economy of developing nations, this can be seen as an important 
decision that advances the global economic order towards democracy. 
 
 
The G-20 member states also agreed to adopt mutual evaluations of 
policy in order to build a cooperative system for sustainable 
balanced growth, reorganize the capital structure of the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank by 2011, and 
strengthen regulations on financial institutions.  They also 
reaffirmed a global economic keynote of openness and clarified the 
principle that nations should not use crisis to retreat into 
protectionism. 
 
The problem, however, is not only that many of the agreements made 
in the past few days lack not only substance, but also binding 
force.  This is the case with the reorganization of country 
representation at the IMF and World Bank, which is directly related 
to the democratization of the global economic order.  China and 
others had pressed to resolve the issue during this meeting but the 
summit declaration only provided support for, but no affirmative 
action towards, a shift in quota share for the IMF and World Bank in 
which 5% and 3%, respectively, of the shares from over-represented 
countries would go to under-represented countries.  The summit also 
confirmed the need to improve global governance by tightening the 
lax management of financial institutions that led to the world 
economic crisis; however, a decision on setting a concrete 
international standard was put off until 2012. 
 
In certain respects, the outcome was predictable.  Because the 
number of participating nations has grown and the gaps between them 
are much larger than those among the G8, reaching agreements on 
substantive issues can only get that much more difficult. 
 
The G-20 member countries must refuse to be satisfied with 
 
SEOUL 00001554  005 OF 006 
 
 
agreements made just for agreement's sake if they want to become the 
world's top economic community.  The G-20 must not shy away from the 
issues that were at the root of the world economic crisis, and 
instead should demonstrate the courage to resolve them.  In this 
regard, the role of newly developed nations, starting with South 
Korea which will host next year summit prior to the regularization 
of the G-20 summit process, is important.  The G-20 countries should 
democratize the global economic order by going beyond the interests 
of rising nations and make it easier for poor nations, which are not 
represented, to be heard. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
UN TIDE TURNS AGAINST NORTH 
(JoongAng Ilbo, September 26, 2009, Page 34) 
 
The UN Security Council has unanimously passed a new resolution, No. 
1887, aimed at stopping the spread of nuclear weapons.  U.S. 
President Barack Obama and other members of the Security Council, 
including the permanent members China, Russia, France and Britain, 
supported the resolution.  It called for preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons and related materials, for UN 
members to take action to end nuclear testing, and for a 
strengthening of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.  In 
particular, the resolution states that if a state that receives 
nuclear materials or related equipment doesn't comply with the NPT 
or opts out of the treaty, then the country that provided those 
materials can require their return.  Also, the resolution urges 
states to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. This 
move puts the last touch on a vision of a nuclear-free world.  While 
North Korea and Iran weren't directly mentioned in the resolution, 
heads of state at the meeting pointed to those two countries as 
obstacles to a safe world. 
 
It is not news that international efforts for denuclearization have 
been emphasized and highlighted.  However, as UN Secretary General 
Ban Ki-moon said, this was "a historic moment, a moment offering a 
fresh start toward a new future."  President Obama stressed that 
"international law is not an empty promise, and treaties will be 
enforced."  By doing so, Obama hinted at his intentions to deal 
firmly with the nuclear ambitions of North Korea and Iran.  And with 
the endorsement of this resolution, there could be a new 
international agreement at next April's NPT review summit, which is 
designed to strengthen the treaty. 
 
North Korea should take note of this resolution.  Considering the 
ever-growing international sentiment against nuclear weapons, the 
North's "military first" politics can be sustained only for so long. 
 The North can't live while holding on to nuclear weapons. Its 
isolation in the international community will only deepen, and the 
North will again have to walk the same path of hardship, dealing 
with tens of thousands of deaths from hunger.  Today, the 
international community is urging North Korea to abandon nuclear 
weapons and is offering security assurances and economic aid in 
return, within the framework of the Six-Party dialogue.  North Korea 
must return to the Six-Party Talks immediately. A nuclear weapons 
and military first policy will only lead to destruction. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
NORTH KOREA SHOULD TAKE UNSC'S ANTI-NUCLEAR RESOLUTION SERIOUSLY 
(Dong-a Ilbo, September 28, 2009, Page 31) 
 
The UN Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 1887 on 
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament on September 24. 
The heads of the UNSC member nations came forward to spearhead 
anti-nuclear efforts in order to save the international community 
from nuclear threats.  UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon attached 
significance to the day, describing it as a "historic moment." 
 
 
SEOUL 00001554  006 OF 006 
 
 
Although the resolution did not specifically mention North Korea and 
Iran, the leaders of major nations made it clear that (the 
resolution) is targeted at the two nations.  President Obama warned 
during his speech at the UN General Assembly that "the governments 
of North Korea and Iran threaten to take us down this dangerous 
slope" and "they must be held accountable."  French President 
Nicolas Sarkozy said after the adoption of the resolution that for 
almost 20 years since 1993, the Pyongyang regime has been developing 
nuclear and missile programs and exporting sensitive technologies 
overseas, and he urged every UN member nation to supervise and seize 
North Korea's illegal weapons and nuclear exports. 
 
The international community's commitment to nuclear 
non-proliferation is stronger than ever before.  Since President 
Obama advocated a nuclear-weapons-free world in April, he has 
ambitiously taken the road to nuclear non-proliferation.  He will 
chair the Global Nuclear Security Summit next March and the NPT 
(Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty) Review Conference next May.  The 
reason why the special, summit-level meeting of the UN Security 
Council was held after five years was that its member nations 
considered nuclear threats from North Korea and Iran to be serious. 
 
Russia is also taking part in the U.S.'s anti-nuclear efforts. 
During their summit on September 23, President Obama and Russian 
President Dmitry Medvedev agreed to consider imposing additional 
serious sanctions on Iran if the nation does not accept the 
international community's proposal to end the nuclear standoff.  The 
two Presidents also promised to come up with a new accord which will 
replace the START-1 treaty set to expire this year. 
 
The anti-nuclear resolution, which was adopted by the heads of the 
UNSC member nations, carries more weight than an agreement from the 
Six-Party Talks attended by vice minister-level officials.  Through 
the resolution, the UNSC members also showed their willingness to 
abide by UNSC Resolutions 1718 and 1874.   The latest resolution 
even "encourages States to require as a condition of nuclear exports 
that the recipient State agree that, in the event that it should 
terminate, withdraw from, or be found by the IAEA Board of Governors 
to be in non-compliance with its IAEA safeguards agreement, the 
supplier state would have a right to require the return of nuclear 
material and equipment provided prior to such termination, 
non-compliance or withdrawal, as well as any special nuclear 
material produced through the use of such material or equipment." 
If North Korea continues to ignore these warnings, it will 
inevitably be driven into a corner with its regime security 
deteriorating. 
 
 
STEPHENS
</file>