^ 문서참조번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 비밀등급 ^ 출처 ^ 태그 ^
| 09SEOUL1811 | 2009-11-16 | 미분류 | 주한미국대사관 | {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }} |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 16일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 09 SEOUL 001811

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US
제 목: [[http://www.mediatoday.co.kr/?mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=84173|서울, 언론 보도; 2009년 11월 16일]]
번역자: PoirotKr (트위터 사용자명) --- //[[poirotkr@gmail.com|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2016/05/03 03:39//
===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보
정부, 올초부터 기업들 연쇄 접촉 / 삼성·파크웨이 등과 세종시 협의

중앙일보
‘저출산 그늘’ 불법 낙태 단속한다

동아일보
“미국車값 10% 내려도 안산다” 73%

한국일보
첫 해외나들이 설렘이 ‘참극’으로

한겨레 신문
'위법 방송장악' 최시중 책임 1순위

세계일보
전국에 177곳 ‘특구 공화국’

서울신문
세종시에 기업유치 총력

===== 국내 동향 =====

서해 연평도 이북 북한지역에 배치된 지대함 미사일기지의 사격통제 레이더가 15일 한때 가동돼 군이 초계함을 안전한 지역으로 이동시켰다고 군 소식통은 전했다. (전체)

한국 보수 단체는 19일 오바마 대통령의 방한에 맞춰 미국에서 한국으로 전시 작전통제권 전환을 연기할 것을 주장하는 대규모 시위를 개최하였다. (조선)

===== 국제 뉴스 =====

오바마는 15일 싱가포르에서 열린 아시아·태평양경제협력체(APEC) 정상회의에서 중국을 동반자로 인정하고 아시아 국가들의 대미 수출 의존 탈피 등을 골자로 한 신(新)아시아 정책을 밝혔다. (중앙, 한겨레)

오바마 대통령은 14일 일본 도쿄에서 연설을 통해 북한이 핵 개발을 포기하면 미국은 북한에 지금과는 다른 미래를 제공할 준비가 돼 있다고 말했다. (한국, 한겨레)

<미(美) '북(北) 제재 주역' 골드버그 교체 보즈워스 방북(訪北) 앞둔 유화 제스처?>: 외교 소식통에 따르면 필립 골드버그 대북 제재 조정관을 교체하고 그를 국무부 정보조사 차관보로 지명했다. (조선)
===== 미디어 분석 =====

==== 미국과 아시아: 오바마의 일본 연설과 아태경제협력체 정상회담 ====

모든 한국 언론은 버락 오바마 대통령이 '신 아시아 정책'을 설명한 11월 14일 산토리 연설을 다루면서 오바마가 스스로를 "사상 첫 태평양 대통령"이라고 칭하며 아시아와의 연대 의사를 분명히 밝혔다고 보도했다.

널리 인용된 오바마 대통령의 연설 내용: "직접적인 외교와 함께 우리의 동반국들과 서로 협력하면서, (북한이 핵 개발을 포기할 경우) 미국은 북한에게 다른 미래를 제시할 준비가 되어 있습니다. …우리는 위협당하지 않을 것이며, 말이 아닌 행동을 통하여 분명한 메시지를 보낼 것입니다."

중도 우파 중앙일보 사설: "오바마 행정부의 ‘신(新)아시아 정책 구상’을 담은 산토리홀 연설은 세계의 중심으로 부상하고 있는 아시아와의 협력과 유대를 강조한 기념비적 연설이라고 본다. 균형 잡힌 사고와 접근이 돋보인 연설에서 제시된 구상이 구체적 행동으로 이어지길 기대한다."

보수 동아일보 사설 주장: "오바마는 아시아 중시 정책을 언급하는 가운데 대북정책을 거론했다. …오바마가 북핵 해결 방안을 아시아 중시정책을 실천하는 사례로 제시한 것이어서 더욱 무게감이 느껴진다. …이번에도 그렇게 될지 아니면 북한에 대한 제재가 본격화할지는 북한의 선택에 달려 있다. 김정일 북한 국방위원장은 오바마의 발언을 심각하게 받아들이고 현명한 선택을 해야 한다."

좌파 성향 한겨레 신문은 <[사설] 오바마의 중국 중시정책에 적극 대처해야>란 제하의 기사를 실었다. 한겨레 기사 내용: [오바마 대통령은 “중국과 영향권의 확대를 경쟁하지 않고 협력 분야를 개척하는 것이 아시아·태평양 지역의 발전에 기여할 것”이라며 “중국을 제어할 의사가 없다”는 점을 분명히 했다. 사실상 세계 2위의 강대국으로 부상한 중국의 위상을 인정하고, 정치·경제·환경 문제뿐 아니라 군사 문제까지 중국과의 협력을 확대해 나가겠다는 의사표시이다."]

==== 북한 ====

보수 조선일보는 <미(美) '북(北) 제재 주역' 골드버그 교체 보즈워스 방북(訪北) 앞둔 유화 제스처?>란 제목의 내부 지면 기사에서 국무부 정보조사 차관보로 내정된 필립 골드버그 대북 제재 조정관의 발언을 외교 소식통의 입을 통해 전했다. 조선의 보도 내용: "한·미 양국 당국자들은 골드버그가 자신이 원하는 직위를 찾아 이동했을 뿐, 특별한 정치적 의미가 없다고 강조하고 있다. 하지만 오바마 행정부가 북한과의 대화를 숙고하는 과정에서 이런 결정이 내려짐에 따라 결과적으로는 당장 보즈워스(Bosworth) 대북정책 특별대표의 방북에 긍정적 영향을 미칠 것으로 예상된다."

===== 사설/논단 =====

**[이홍구 칼럼] 오바마 대통령 방한과 한·미 관계 새 지평**(중앙일보, 11월 16일, 35면: 발췌)

이홍구 전 총리

…특히 미국의 정치·군사적 영향력 감소 및 세계로 확산된 금융위기는 다극화 시대에 걸맞은 새로운 국제질서의 모색을 인류공통의 과제로 부각시키고 있다. 바로 이러한 때에 오바마 대통령은 미국과 세계를 위해 미래의 문을 열 수 있는 지도자로 부상한 것이다.

오바마 대통령이 인류의 평화와 번영을 위해 제시한 어젠다는 우리 한국을 포함한 지구촌 곳곳에서 광범위한 공감대를 형성하고 있다. …기후변화의 문제, … 핵무기의 확산 및 감축 부진의 문제, … 등은 더 이상 국제사회가 방치할 수 없는 시급한 과제들이며 이에 공동으로 대처하기 위한 노력에 그가 앞장서겠다는 결의를 명백히 했다. 이러한 오바마 대통령의 입장은 국제정치에서 미국의 리더십을 보강할 뿐 아니라 한·미 동맹 관계의 질적 발전에도 긍정적으로 작용하고 있다.

오바마 대통령이 지금 방문하고 있는 동북아시아는 오늘날 가장 빠른 속도로 경제성장을 성취한 국제정치 및 경제의 새로운 중심지역으로 각광 받고 있다. 그러나 어두웠던 지난날의 유산과 끈질기게 풀리지 않는 난제들이 마구 얽혀 있는 곳이 바로 이 지역임을 간과해서는 안 될 것이다. 64년 전 역사상 처음으로 핵폭탄의 세례를 받았던 히로시마가 이곳에 있다. 그 처참한 핵무기의 희생자가 아직도 산증인으로 고통 받고 있음에도 불구하고, 정권의 안보를 위해 핵전쟁의 위험도 불사하겠다는 집단이 이 지역에 상존하고 있다. 무엇보다도 제2차 세계대전이 남긴 마지막 숙제인 한반도의 통일도 아직 뚜렷한 해결의 실마리가 보이지 않고 있다. 한마디로 동맹국인 한국과 미국이 함께 나아가야 할 길은 멀고도 험난한 것이다.

우리 한국인은…국제사회, 특히 동맹국과 함께 나아갈 목표를 위해서는 우리의 몫을 충실히 담당할 결의와 자신을 갖고 있다. …전쟁과 테러에 시달리고 있는 지역의 평화유지를 위한 국제사회의 군사적 집단노력에도 적극적으로 참여하려 하고 있다. 기후변화에 대처하는 국제사회의 공동노력에도 ‘녹색성장’을 경제정책의 중심축으로 설정하고 적극 동참하고 있다. 이러한 우리의 전향적 입장은 국익을 추구한다는 당연한 원칙에 더하여 한·미 동맹이 함께 추구하는 평화롭고 공정한 지구촌 질서와 체제에 대한 꿈과 믿음에 기초한 것이다.

오늘의 한·미 동맹은 단순한 군사동맹이 아니라 지역의 안전과 번영을 담보하며 평화로운 이웃을 건설하는, 그리하여 새롭고 생산적인 국제질서를 창출하는 21세기형 동반자 관계다.

오바마 대통령의 방한은 바로 이러한 미래지향적 한·미 동반자 관계를 내외에 과시하는 계기가 되리라고 믿는다.

**[사설] 오바마의 중국 중시정책에 적극 대처해야**(한겨레 신문, 2009년 11월 16일, 27면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 그제 아시아 순방 첫 방문지인 일본에서, 아시아를 중시하고 아시아 문제에 적극 관여하겠다는 내용의 아시아정책을 발표했다. 지난해 세계적인 금융위기로 미국의 힘이 쇠퇴하는 가운데 정치·경제적인 존재감이 더욱 커지는 아시아와의 관계를 더욱 심화할 수밖에 없는 현실을 반영한 것이라고 할 수 있다. ‘핵 없는 세계’를 호소한 지난 4월의 체코 프라하 연설, 이슬람 세계에 대한 대화와 화해정책을 선언한 지난 6월의 이집트 카이로 연설에 버금가는 중요한 대외정책 연설이라고 할 만하다.

오바마 대통령의 아시아 정책 가운데 가장 눈길을 끄는 대목은 중국 중시이다. 오바마 대통령은 “중국과 영향권의 확대를 경쟁하지 않고 협력 분야를 개척하는 것이 아시아·태평양 지역의 발전에 기여할 것”이라며 “중국을 제어할 의사가 없다”는 점을 분명히 했다. 사실상 세계 2위의 강대국으로 부상한 중국의 위상을 인정하고, 정치·경제·환경 문제뿐 아니라 군사 문제까지 중국과의 협력을 확대해 나가겠다는 의사표시이다. 어제부터 3박4일간의 일정으로 중국 방문에 들어간 오바마 대통령과 중국 지도자들이 나눌 대화가 세계적인 시선을 끄는 이유이다.

오바마 대통령은 전통적인 우방인 한국·일본과의 동맹 강화와 북한 핵 문제에 대한 단호한 태도도 함께 밝혔다. 한국과 일본에 대해서는 미국의 확장억지 제공을 다시 한번 강조하고, 북한에는 6자회담에 복귀해 핵확산방지조약(NPT) 등의 약속을 지킬 것을 촉구했다. 하지만, 중국 중시에 견줘 무게감이 떨어진다는 인상을 지울 수 없다.

미-중 정상회담과 관련해 우리가 가장 관심을 가져야 할 분야는 역시 당면 현안인 북핵 문제이다. 미·중 두 나라는 올 하반기를 기점으로 대화노선을 주도하고 있다. 새달 초에는 스티븐 보즈워스 미 대북정책 특별대표가 북한을 방문해 북-미 대화를 재개한다. 하지만, 이명박 정부는 아직도 대북 압박정책에 대한 미련을 버리지 않고 있다. 이것이 한-중 간 불화의 한 원인으로 지목되고 있다. 마침 정부는 신임 중국대사에 이 대통령의 측근인 류우익 전 대통령실장을 내정했다. 정부는 실세 대사의 임명을 계기로 한반도 문제뿐 아니라 세계 문제에서 강력한 발언권을 행사하는 중국 정부와 긴밀한 협력 체제를 구축할 수 있도록 노력해야 할 것이다.

(이 기사는 해당 신문사가 제공한 번역이며 한국어 버전과 동일하다.)

**[사설] 오바마의 신아시아 정책 구상을 주목한다**(중앙일보, 11월 16일 34면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령이 지난 주말 도쿄 시내 산토리홀에서 아시아 정책에 관한 역사적인 연설을 했다. 미국과 함께 ‘G2’로 떠오른 중국과의 관계를 비롯, 한국·일본 등과의 동맹관계, 북핵 문제, 동아시아에서 미국의 역할 등 아시아인들이 궁금해하거나 관심을 가질 만한 거의 모든 문제에 대해 솔직한 생각을 밝혔다. 오바마 행정부의 ‘신(新)아시아 정책 구상’을 담은 산토리홀 연설은 세계의 중심으로 부상하고 있는 아시아와의 협력과 유대를 강조한 기념비적 연설이라고 본다. 균형 잡힌 사고와 접근이 돋보인 연설에서 제시된 구상이 구체적 행동으로 이어지길 기대한다.

가장 중요한 중국과의 관계에서 오바마 대통령은 “미국은 중국을 봉쇄하지 않을 것이며 상호 관심사에 대해 실용적 협력을 추구할 것”이라고 선언했다. 21세기의 문제는 어느 국가도 홀로 대처할 수 없고, 미국과 중국이 서로 협력해 대처할 때 더 좋은 결과를 얻을 수 있다는 것이다. 중국을 파트너로 인정하고, 글로벌 이슈에 대해 서로 협력하는 실용적 동반자 관계를 추구하겠다는 구상이다. 그러면서도 그는 “중국과의 대화에서 미국이 소중하게 여기는 근본가치를 분명히 표현하기를 주저하지 않을 것”이라며 자유·인권 등의 문제에 대해서는 확실히 선을 그었다.

오바마 대통령은 “미·중 간의 깊은 관계가 양자동맹의 약화를 의미하지 않는다”고 강조함으로써 미·중 접근에 대한 아시아·태평양 지역 동맹국들의 불안감 해소에도 역점을 뒀다. 어떤 경우에도 한국·일본·호주·태국·필리핀 등 동맹국의 안보에 대한 미국의 약속은 흔들리지 않을 것이란 공약이다. 특히 미국과의 대등한 관계를 내세운 일본 민주당 정부를 의식, 평등과 상호존중에 바탕을 둔 동맹관계를 거듭 강조했다.

북한에 대해서도 분명한 입장을 밝혔다. 북한을 6자회담과 비확산 체제로 복귀시켜 완전하고 검증 가능한 한반도 비핵화를 실현하는 것이 목표이며, 북한이 이에 응할 경우 지금과 완전히 다른 새로운 미래가 열릴 것이라고 역설했다. 한국 등 6자회담 참가국들과의 긴밀한 공조를 통한 북핵 문제 해결 원칙과 핵 없는 북한의 비전을 재확인했다고 본다.

오바마 대통령은 “아시아·태평양 국가로서 미국은 이 지역의 미래상을 정립하는 논의에 전적으로 참여할 것”이라고 선언했다. 특히 아세안(동남아국가연합)과 한·중·일 및 인도·호주·뉴질랜드 등 16개국이 참여하고 있는 동아시아정상회의(EAS)와의 협력 관계를 기대한다고 밝혀 EAS를 통한 동아시아 공동체 논의 참여가 미국의 입장임을 드러냈다. 동아시아 통합 논의에 관한 미국의 스탠스를 분명히 한 효과가 있다고 본다. 하지만 미국의 소비와 아시아의 수출로 세계 경제의 성장을 주도하는 데는 한계가 있다며 글로벌 균형 성장을 강조한 것은 한국·중국 등 수출의존형 국가들로서는 신경 써야 할 대목이다.

**[사설]北“핵 포기하면 다른 미래”에 눈뜰 때 됐건만**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 16일, 35면)

버락 오바마 미국 대통령은 14일 일본 방문 중에 “북한이 핵 개발을 포기할 경우 미국은 북한에 지금과는 다른 미래를 제공할 준비가 돼 있다”고 말했다. 북-미 양자대화를 앞두고 있는 미국이 북한과의 갈등해소 차원을 넘어 큰 폭의 지원을 염두에 두고 있음을 알리는 발언이다. 오바마는 이에 앞서 연합뉴스와의 회견에서는 “핵 프로그램의 완전한 제거를 향해 되돌릴 수 없는 조치를 취한다면 북한은 안보와 존경을 향한 평화적인 길을 걷게 될 것”이라고 강조했다. 그가 북한이 총체적 위기에서 벗어날 수 있는 방법을 제시한 것이다.

오바마의 발언은 사실상 한미중일 4개국 정상들이 만들어낼 북핵 해법의 예고편이다. 오바마는 일본 방문에 이어 싱가포르를 거쳐 어제부터 3박 4일 일정의 중국 방문을 시작했다. 18, 19일에는 한국을 방문한다. 오바마는 “북핵의 포괄적인 해결에 대해 이명박 대통령과 완전한 의견일치를 보고 있다”고 밝혔다. 일본과는 논의가 끝났기 때문에 오바마의 남은 과제는 중국과의 조율이다. 그는 “중국과의 관계 강화가 동맹국들과의 유대를 약화시키지 않을 것”이라며 중국을 협력 파트너로 인정했다. 후진타오 중국 국가주석이 자국을 협력 파트너로 대우하는 오바마의 대북 ‘당근’ 정책을 지지할 가능성이 높다.

오바마는 아시아 중시 정책을 언급하는 가운데 대북정책을 거론했다. 하와이에서 태어나 인도네시아에서 어린 시절을 보낸 그는 스스로 ‘미국의 첫 아시아태평양 출신 대통령’이라는 말도 했다. 오바마가 북핵 해결 방안을 아시아 중시정책을 실천하는 사례로 제시한 것이어서 더욱 무게감이 느껴진다. 오바마는 ‘채찍’도 거론했다. 그는 북의 핵 개발 위협에 굴복하지 않을 것이며 “핵무기가 존재하는 한 한국과 일본을 포함한 동맹국들의 안보를 보장하는 강력하고 효과적인 핵 억지력을 유지할 것”이라고 덧붙였다.

핵무기를 붙잡고 고립에 빠질 것인지, 새로운 미래를 맞을 것인지는 북한의 선택에 달려있다. 김정일 북한 국방위원장은 오바마의 발언을 심각하게 받아들이고 현명한 선택을 해야 한다. 북한이 2차 핵실험에 이어 서해에서 무력도발까지 했지만 아직은 대화의 문이 열려있다. 오바마가 아시아 순방에서 제의한 대화를 외면하면 국제사회가 힘을 합쳐 채찍을 드는 수밖에 없다. 

===== 특집 =====

**“미국차 싸게 나와도 정비 - 디자인 - 연비때문에 꺼려져”**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 16일, 3면)

장강명, 김상운 기자

“한국은 미국에 자동차시장 문을 더 개방해야 한다. 미국 자동차 회사들이 한국 시장에서 똑같이 경쟁할 수 있어야 한다.”(론 커크 미국 무역대표부 대표, 5일 한미재계회의 만찬 연설) 

“한국은 그동안 비관세 장벽을 동원해 외국산 자동차를 몰아냈다. 한미 자유무역협정을 수정해야 한다.”(미국 상하원 의원 12명, 6일 커크 대표에게 보낸 서한)

최근 미국에서 나오는 이 같은 주장들에 대해 국내 전문가들은 대부분 “미국이 한국 시장을 너무 모른다”거나 “미국 유권자들에게 보여주려고 하는 발언들”이라는 반응을 보였다.

○ 미국 차 인기 없는 이유는?

동아일보 산업부가 벌인 조사에서 전문가 27명 중 18명은 미국 차가 한국에서 인기 없는 이유를 ‘제품 자체의 문제’라고 답했다. 특히 “전반적인 품질이 안 좋은 데다 너무 크고 연료소비효율이 안 좋다”는 점을 지적한 사람이 많았다. 김기찬 한국자동차산업학회장은 “미국 차 업체들은 그동안 제품보다는 금융 부문에 더 신경을 써 왔다”며 “생산 현장의 경쟁력 부족이 자동차에 드러난다”고 말했다.

한국 소비자의 취향에 맞지 않는다는 비판도 많았다. 특히 ‘디자인 코드’가 맞지 않는다는 지적이 많았다. 미국의 차관급 인사가 한국을 방문해서 시장 반응이 좋은 미국 자동차 모델에 대해 듣고 “왜 미국에서는 별 인기도 없는 그 차가 한국에서는 잘 팔리냐”며 반문했다는 일화도 있다.

일반인들을 대상으로 한 조사에서도 미국 차가 안 팔리는 이유에 대해 ‘디자인’을 꼽은 사람이 16.8%였다. 미국 차의 값이 10% 싸져도 다른 차를 사겠다고 답한 사람 중 18.7%는 그 이유를 “디자인이 마음에 들지 않아서”라고 답했다.

특히 지난해와 올해는 고유가와 글로벌 금융위기로 전 세계적으로 연비가 떨어지는 미국 차가 인기가 없었던 반면, 중소형차가 강한 한국의 현대·기아자동차는 미국 시장을 포함한 세계 각국에서 약진했다. 제너럴모터스(GM)와 크라이슬러가 파산 사태를 겪고, 포드도 경영난에 빠지면서 미국 자동차업체들의 브랜드 이미지도 땅에 떨어졌다.

○ “딱히 무역장벽이라 할 만한 게…”

한국 시장의 무역장벽에 대해서도 전문가 대부분은 회의적인 반응을 보였다. 미국 차에 대해 관세 외에 무역 장벽이 있다면 무엇이냐는 질문에 대해 ‘안전·환경 등 자동차 관련 기준이나 규제’를 꼽은 사람은 9명(33.3%), ‘소비자 취향이나 국민 정서’라고 답한 이는 10명(37.0%)이었다. 강철구 한국자동차공업협회 이사는 “나라마다 기후나 운전문화가 다른 만큼 안전·환경 관련 기준과 규제도 달라야 한다”며 “한국에서 차를 수출할 때도 대상 국가의 기준에 맞춘다. 이걸 무역장벽이라고 부를 순 없다”고 비판했다.

소비자 취향이나 국민 정서에 대해서도 한 전문가는 “그런 점이 미국 차를 한국에서 파는 데는 걸림돌이 되겠지만 그걸 무역장벽이라고 할 수 있을지는 의문”이라며 “한국 정부가 미국 차 구매 장려운동이라도 벌여야 한다는 얘기냐”고 반문했다. 한 수입차 업계 종사자는 “과거에는 수입차는 광고를 할 수 없는 등 실제적인 장벽이 있었다”며 “지금은 관세 외에 딱히 장벽이라 할 만한 게 있는지 모르겠다”고 말했다. 무역장벽이 딱히 없다고 답한 전문가도 4명(14.8%)이었다.

○ 유럽·일본차 판매는 고속 성장

한국 자동차 시장에 무역장벽이 있다고 해도 유럽·일본 자동차들은 계속 판매량과 점유율이 성장하고 있다는 반론도 나온다. 한국수입자동차협회에 따르면 2003년 수입차 전체 판매량은 1만9481대로 시장 점유율은 1.9%였던 것이 지난해에는 6만1648대(점유율 6.0%)로 뛰었다. 2002년부터 지난해까지 판매량이 매년 역대 최고치를 기록하며 전년보다 늘었다.

2003년부터 지난해까지 한국에서 유럽 자동차 판매는 1만2535대(점유율 1.2%)에서 3만2756대(3.2%)로 늘었으며, 같은 기간 일본 자동차도 3774대(0.4%)에서 2만1912대(2.1%)로 고속 성장했다. 미국 차는 같은 기간 3172대(0.3%)에서 6980대(0.7%)로 늘어나는 데 그쳤다. BMW ‘뉴7 시리즈’의 경우 올해 한국에서 1∼10월 1578대가 팔려 전 세계에서 4번째로 많이 팔렸다. 수입차에 적용되는 관세율(8%)은 모두 똑같다.

GM대우자동차를 제외하고 한국에서 정식 수입 경로를 통해 팔리는 미국 차 브랜드는 크라이슬러코리아가 판매하는 크라이슬러·지프와 도지, 포드코리아가 판매하는 포드와 링컨, GM코리아가 판매하는 캐딜락과 사브 등이다.

**<오바마 대통령 서면 인터뷰 전문>**(연합뉴스, 2009년 11월 13일)

다음은 연합뉴스가 한국 언론으로는 처음으로 버락 오바마 미국 대통령과 가진 서면 인터뷰 전문이다.

▲나는 아시아와 서울 방문, 그리고 이명박 대통령과의 만남을 고대하고 있습니다. 이 대통령과 나는 매우 돈독한 실무관계를 쌓아왔으며, 이는 글로벌 이슈, 특히 북한 문제와 관련한 우리의 긴밀한 공조에 잘 드러나 있다고 생각합니다.

--북한의 핵 및 미사일 프로그램 문제를 어떻게 풀어나갈 생각이십니까. --미국은 북한과 양자대화를 가질 준비가 돼 있습니까. 또 6자회담이 북한의 비핵화를 이뤄낼 수 있다고 생각하십니까. -조만간 이뤄질 북.미 대화를 앞두고 북한에 전달하고 싶은 메시지는 무엇입니까.

▲북한의 핵과 미사일 능력은 한국과 미국은 물론 국제사회에 있어서도 중대한 우려사항입니다. 이 이슈는 이 대통령과 내가 심도 있게 논의해온 것으로, 우리는 서울에서 이 문제를 비롯해 다른 주제에 관해 협의를 하게 될 것입니다. 이 대통령과 나는 북한의 핵과 미사일, 확산 문제에 대해 `포괄적인 해결(comprehensive resolution)'을 이뤄내야 할 필요성에 `완전한 의견일치(in full agreement)'를 보고 있으며, (한.미) 두 정부간의 협력도 대단히 긴밀합니다. 우리는 6자회담이 (북핵문제의) 평화적인 해결을 달성하기 위한 최선의 틀이며, 2005년 9.19 공동성명이야말로 우리가 성취해야만 하는 목표를 분명하게 제시하고 있다고 믿고 있습니다. 우리는 비핵화 협상의 신속한 재개로 이어질 수 있다면 6자회담의 일환으로 (북.미) 양자회담을 개최하는 것에 열린 자세를 갖고 있습니다.

대량살상무기(WMD)와 이의 운반수단을 획득하려는 북한의 시도는 불안정 요인으로, 평화와 안보에 위협을 주고 있습니다. 유엔 안전보장이사회가 1874호 결의에 따라 강력한 (제재) 조치를 채택하고, 유엔 회원국들이 이 같은 결의의 조항을 이행하고 있는 것도 다 그런 이유에서 입니다. 핵무기와 미사일 운반시스템을 추구하는 것은 북한과 역내를 안전하지 못하게 하는 반면, 한반도의 평화적인 비핵화를 달성하기 위한 6자회담 프로세스에서 이뤄질 협상은 북한과 역내에 안전과 번영을 가져다 줄 수 있습니다.

이것이 바로 북한이 직면하고 있는 선택입니다. 북한이 국제적인 의무사항을 준수하고, 자신들의 약속에 따른다면 국제사회로부터 인정을 받는 쪽으로 나아가는 기회를 얻게 될 것입니다. 핵프로그램의 완전한 제거를 향해 되돌릴 수 없는 조치를 취한다면, 북한은 안전과 존경을 향한 평화적인 길을 걷게 될 것입니다.

--한국의 내년 G20 정상회의 개최에 대해 어떻게 생각하십니까.

▲한국이 내년 G20 정상회의 개최지로 부상한 것은 국제무대에서 중요한 리더십을 발휘하고 있다는 증거입니다. 이 대통령께서는 한국의 경제가 하강국면을 벗어나 현재의 상승궤도에 오르는데 탁월한 역량을 발휘해 왔습니다. 나는 경제정책 측면에서 이 대통령의 지속적이고 강력한 리더십이 아시아.태평양지역에서 발휘되기를 기대하고 있습니다.

한국의 내년 G20 정상회의 개최는 또 상대적으로 짧은 기간에 달성한 경제적 성공과 세계의 선진경제 반열에 진입하기 위한 움직임을 대변하는 가장 중요한 본보기입니다. 한국의 성공은 여전히 개발도상에 있는 국가들에 훌륭한 본보기며, 내년 G20 개최는 (한국이) 수행하고 있는 국제적 리더십을 드러내는 것입니다. 나는 한국이 내년에 G20 정상회의를 개최하는데 동의해 준 것을 기쁘게 생각하며, 미국은 G20의 성공적인 개최를 위해 힘쓰는 한국의 노력을 지원할 것입니다.

**“미국車값 10% 내려도 안산다” 73%**(동아일보, 2009년 11월 16일, 1면)

장강명, 김상운 기자

버락 오바마 미국 대통령의 방한을 앞두고 미국 일부 정치권에서 “한국이 미국에 자동차시장의 문을 더 개방해야 한다”는 주장이 나오고 있다. 그러나 한국 소비자와 통상·자동차 전문가들은 “미국 차가 한국에서 팔리지 않는 이유는 제품 자체의 경쟁력 부족 탓”이라고 보는 것으로 나타났다. 또 국내 소비자 10명 중 7명은 미국 차 값이 지금보다 10% 떨어지더라도 미국 차 대신 한국 차나 일본·유럽 차를 사겠다고 답했다.

동아일보 산업부가 자동차포털 엔크린닷컴과 함께 10, 11일 이 사이트 회원 513명을 대상으로 e메일 설문조사를 실시한 결과, 응답자의 절반가량(49.4%)은 미국 차가 한국에서 잘 팔리지 않는 이유로 디자인(16.8%), 연료소비효율(12.7%), 성능(7.4%), 브랜드 이미지(7.2%) 등 제품 자체의 문제를 지적했다. 조사 대상자의 90.8%는 차량 소유주이며, 이 중 41.2%는 보유 차량이 2000cc 이상 중대형 차라고 답했다.

미국 차 값이 지금보다 10% 떨어진다고 해도 그 돈으로 살 수 있는 다른 국산차나 유럽 차, 일본 차를 사겠다는 사람이 조사 대상자의 72.9%였다. 현재 미국 차에 적용되는 관세율(8%)이 당장 없어지더라도 한국에서 판매는 별로 증가하지 않을 것이라는 예상이 가능하다. 수입차 업계에서는 한미 자유무역협정(FTA)이 발효돼 미국 차에 대한 관세가 없어지더라도 실제 소비자가격은 4∼6%만 싸질 것으로 보고 있다. 이항구 산업연구원 기계산업팀장은 “미국 내에서도 자동차 분야 소비자 만족도를 조사하면 상위권은 아시아 제품이 휩쓴다”고 지적했다.

한미 FTA 자동차부문 협상 결과에 대해서는 수입차업체 관계자 12명을 포함한 자동차 및 통상 전문가 27명 중 12명(44.4%)이 “두 나라의 개방 수준이 비슷하다”고, 9명(33.3%)은 “한국의 개방 수준이 더 높다”고 답했다. 2명만 “미국의 개방 수준이 더 높다”고 했다.

한국은 지난해 완성차 기준으로 59만여 대를 미국에 수출했지만, 미국이 한국으로 수출한 차량은 8864대에 그쳤다. 미국 차의 한국시장 점유율은 수년째 1% 미만이다.

미국 제너럴모터스(GM)가 지분 70.1%를 보유한 GM대우자동차의 국내 판매를 미국 차 점유율에 포함해야 한다는 주장도 나온다. GM대우차는 지난해 한국에서 11만여 대(시장점유율 10.1%)를 팔았다. 현대·기아자동차의 미국 시장 점유율이 6∼8%라고 할 때도 앨라배마 현지 생산분을 포함한 것이다. 이상호 세종대 경제학과 교수는 “GM대우차의 한국 판매는 미국 자동차회사의 현지생산 판매”라며 “정부가 이 점을 적극 알려야 한다”고 말했다.

스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다
===== 영문 원본 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL1811.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 SEOUL 001811 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL, PGOV, MARR, ECON, KPAO, KS, US 
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; November 16, 2009 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo 
ROKG Has Contacted Companies 
Since Early This Year to Discuss Sejong City 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Birthrate Crisis Forces Tougher Stand on Abortion 
 
Dong-a Ilbo 
Survey: 73 Percent of Respondents Say 
They "Will Not Buy American Cars Even 
if Prices Fall10 Percent" 
 
Hankook Ilbo 
Eight Japanese Tourists among Dead 
in Indoor Shooting Range Fire 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Broadcasting and Communications Commission Chairman 
Choi Si-jung Primarily Responsible for 
"Illegally Controlling Broadcasting" 
 
Segye Ilbo 
ROKG Overflows with Various Special Zones, 
Innovative and Business Cities 
 
Seoul Shinmun 
ROKG Making All-out Effort to Attract Companies 
to Sejong City 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
According to a military source, North Korea yesterday briefly 
activated its radar systems for surface-to-ship missiles at a 
western coastal site, prompting ROK navy ships to move to safer 
areas. (All) 
 
ROK conservative groups will hold a massive rally on Nov. 19 to call 
for a delay in transferring wartime operational control from the 
U.S. to the ROK. This rally is timed to coincide with President 
Barack Obama's visit to Seoul. (Chosun) 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL NEWS 
------------------ 
 
President Obama, during a Nov. 15 APEC summit in Singapore, unveiled 
his new Asia policy that acknowledged China as a partner and urged 
Asian countries to stop being dependent on exports to the U.S. 
(JoongAng, Hankyoreh) 
 
President Obama also said in a Nov. 14 speech in Japan that the U.S. 
is ready to provide a different future to North Korea if the North 
gives up its nuclear ambitions. (Hankook, Hankyoreh) 
 
 "Conciliatory Gesture Ahead of Bosworth's Visit to 
Pyongyang?:"According to a diplomatic source in Washington, the 
White House has replaced Philip Goldberg, Coordinator for the 
Implementation of UN Sanctions on North Korea, by naming him as 
Assistant Secretary at the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. 
(Chosun) 
 
 
MEDIA ANALYSIS 
-------------- 
 
U.S.-Asia: Pres. Obama Speech in Japan, APEC Summit 
 
All ROK media today covered President Barack Obama's Nov. 14 speech 
 
SEOUL 00001811  002 OF 009 
 
 
in Japan, in which he outlined his "new Asia policy" and 
demonstrated his solidarity with Asia by calling himself "America's 
first Pacific President." 
 
President Obama was widely quoted: "Working in tandem with our 
partners, and supported by direct diplomacy, the U.S. is prepared to 
offer North Korea a different future (if it abandons its nuclear 
ambitions.)  We will not be cowed by threats, and we will continue 
to send a clear message through our actions, and not just our 
words." 
 
Right-of-center JoongAng Ilbo editorialized: "(President Obama's 
speech) is a landmark one, since it stresses cooperation and 
solidarity with Asia, which is emerging as the center of the world. 
We truly hope that President Obama will deliver on the visions he 
presented in his speech, which notably feature his balanced thoughts 
and approaches." 
 
Conservative Dong-a Ilbo's editorial argued: "While talking about 
Asia-focused policy, President Obama mentioned North Korea policy. 
...  This carries all the more weight because President Obama 
presented the resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue as part 
of his efforts to carry out Asia-focused policy. ...  It is up to 
North Korea whether it remains in isolation by holding on to its 
nuclear weapons or embraces a new future.  North Korean leader Kim 
Jong-il should take President Obama's statements seriously and make 
a wise choice." 
 
Left-leaning Hankyoreh Shinmun, meanwhile, carried an editorial 
entitled "Need to Deal Proactively with Obama's Policy of Valuing 
China."  It stated: "President Obama made it clear that the U.S. has 
no intention of checking China by saying, 'Cultivating spheres of 
cooperation with China - not competing spheres of influence - will 
lead to progress in the Asia Pacific.'  This means that the U.S. 
practically acknowledged China as the world's second superpower and 
expressed its intention to expand cooperation with China not only on 
political, economic and environmental issues but also on the 
military issue." 
 
N. Korea 
 
Carrying the headline, "Conciliatory Gesture Ahead of Bosworth's 
Visit to Pyongyang?," conservative Chosun Ilbo ran an inside-page 
report quoting a diplomatic source in Washington as saying that 
Philip Goldberg, Coordinator for the Implementation of UN Sanctions 
on North Korea, has been appointed as Assistant Secretary of the 
Bureau of Intelligence and Research at the State Department.  The 
report went on to say: "ROKG and USG officials say Goldberg's 
replacement reflects his personal wish to move to a new post. ... 
Given that the appointment comes at a time when the USG is 
considering dialogue with North Korea, however, it could have a 
positive effect on Special Representative for North Korea Policy 
Stephen Bosworth's visit to the North." 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
OBAMA'S VISIT TO SEOUL AND A NEW HORIZON FOR ROK-U.S. RELATIONS 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 16, page 35: Excerpts) 
 
By Former Prime Minister Lee Hong-koo 
 
With the U.S.'s waning political and military influence and the 
global financial crisis, we are facing common tasks to seek a new 
world order in an era of multipolarization.  At this time, President 
Obama is emerging as a leader who can open the door to the future 
for the U.S. and the world. 
 
The international community including the ROK has a shared 
understanding of the agenda President Obama has proposed for peace 
and prosperity of mankind.  President Obama reaffirmed his 
commitment to taking the lead over efforts to address the issues of 
climate change, nuclear proliferation and poverty by recognizing 
 
SEOUL 00001811  003 OF 009 
 
 
them as imminent tasks the international community cannot ignore any 
longer.  This position by President Obama helps enhance U.S. 
leadership in international politics and brings positive effects to 
the ROK-U.S. alliance. 
 
Northeast Asia, where President Obama is making a tour, has achieved 
economic growth at the fastest pace, gaining attention as a new 
center of international politics and economy.  However, Northeast 
Asia is also riddled with complicated challenges.  Even though 
Hiroshima was (the first city in history) to suffer from an atomic 
bombing 64 years ago, (North Korea) is threatening nuclear war in 
order to secure its own regime.  Most of all, little progress has 
been made for the unification of the Korean Peninsula.  In a word, 
the ROK and the U.S. as allies face a rough road ahead. 
 
The ROK is fully committed to playing its role to achieve common 
goals along with its allies.  The ROK has decided to sharply 
increase its aid to developing countries and is actively 
participating in international efforts to keep peace in the regions 
plagued by war and terrorism.  The ROK also proactively engages in 
international efforts to cope with climate change by setting "green 
growth" as a central axis of its economic policy.  This 
forward-looking approach is based on our belief that a peaceful and 
fair world order can be achieved through the ROK-U.S. alliance. 
 
The ROK-U.S. alliance is not just a military alliance but a 21st 
century partnership that guarantees security and prosperity and 
creates a new productive world order. 
 
President Obama's visit to the ROK will provide an opportunity to 
demonstrate this future-oriented ROK-U.S. alliance internationally. 
 
 
 
NEED TO DEAL PROACTIVELY WITH OBAMA'S POLICY OF VALUING CHINA 
(Hankyoreh Shinmun, November 16, 2009, Page 27) 
 
In Japan, the first stop in his tour to Asia, U.S. President Barack 
Obama announced an Asia policy of prioritizing (the region) and 
actively participating in Asian issues.  One could say this is a 
reflection of a reality in which the U.S., its power weakening due 
to last year's global financial crisis, has no choice but to deepen 
ties with Asia, whose political and economic presence is growing. 
It was a major foreign policy speech second only to his Prague 
speech in April in which he called for a world without nuclear 
weapons and his June speech in Cairo in which called for dialogue 
and reconciliation with the Muslim world. 
 
Within Obama's Asia policy, the most eye-catching aspect is the 
importance he places on China.  President Obama made it clear that 
the U.S. has no intention of checking China by saying, 'Cultivating 
spheres of cooperation with China - not competing spheres of 
influence - will lead to progress in the Asia Pacific.'  This means 
that the U.S. practically acknowledged China as the world's second 
superpower and expressed its intention to expand cooperation with 
China not only on political, economic and environmental issues but 
also on the military issue.  Not only was this a virtual 
acknowledgement of the prestige of China, which has risen to become 
the world's No. 2 superpower, but is also an expression of 
willingness to further cooperate with China on military issues. 
This is precisely the reason the world has been watching the 
conversations being shared between China's leaders and Obama, who 
kicked off a four-day, three-night visit to China yesterday. 
 
President Obama also revealed his desire to strengthen traditional 
alliances with South Korea and Japan, and a firm attitude regarding 
the North Korean nuclear issue.  Obama once again stressed the 
provision of an expanded U.S. deterrence to aid in protecting South 
Korea and Japan, and called on North Korea to return to the 
Six-Party Talks and keep its prior commitments, including ones 
expressed in the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).  This could 
not erase the impression, however, that compared to the 
prioritization of China, the importance of these issues have 
fallen. 
 
SEOUL 00001811  004 OF 009 
 
 
 
Regarding the U.S.-China summit, the thing we must pay most 
attention to is the pending North Korea nuclear issue.  The U.S. and 
China have been leading a line of dialogue since the second half of 
the year.  Next month, Stephen Bosworth, U.S. Special Representative 
for North Korea Policy, will visit North Korea in an attempt to 
restart North Korea-U.S. dialogue.  Meanwhile, the Lee Myung-bak 
Administration is still not abandoning its policy of putting 
pressure on North Korea, and is being pointed to as a source of 
discord between South Korea and China.  The Administration has named 
Ryu Woo-ik, former Chief Presidential Secretary and a close aide to 
President Lee, as its new ambassador to China.  The Lee government 
must use this nomination of a powerful figure as ambassador to China 
to try to create a system of close cooperation with the Chinese 
government, in which Seoul has a strong voice on not only Korean 
issues, but on world issues as well. 
 
(This is a translation provided by the newspaper, and it is 
identical to the Korean version.) 
 
 
PAYING ATTENTION TO OBAMA'S NEW ASIA POLICY 
(JoongAng Ilbo, November 16, page 34) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama delivered a historic speech about the 
U.S.'s Asia policy at Suntory Hall in Tokyo last weekend.  Obama 
candidly presented his thoughts on almost all issues including: the 
U.S.'s relations with China, which has emerged as the "G2;" the 
U.S.'s alliance with the ROK and Japan; the North Korean issue; and 
the U.S.'s role in East Asia.  These are the issues which people in 
Asia have been wondering about or paying attention to.  (President 
Obama's speech) is a landmark one, since it stresses cooperation and 
solidarity with Asia, which is emerging as the center of the world. 
We truly hope that President Obama will deliver on the visions he 
presented in his speech, which notably feature his balanced thoughts 
and approaches. 
 
Regarding the U.S.'s relations with China, President Obama announced 
that the U.S. will "pursue pragmatic cooperation with China on 
issues of mutual concern" without containing China.  He emphasized, 
"No one nation can meet the challenges of the 21st century on its 
own," adding, "The U.S. and China will both be better off if we meet 
(these challenges) together."  This signifies that the U.S. will 
acknowledge China as a partner and seek a pragmatic partnership 
through cooperation on global issues.  However, Obama drew a clear 
line on freedom and human rights issues by saying, "The U.S. will 
never waver in speaking up for the fundamental values that we hold 
dear because support for human rights and human dignity is ingrained 
in America." 
 
President Obama said that "a deeper relationship with China" does 
not mean "a weakening of our bilateral alliances," trying to dispel 
concerns about U.S.-China relations among the U.S.'s Asia-Pacific 
allies.  This indicates that the U.S. will be committed to the 
security of its allies such as the ROK, Japan, Australia, Thailand, 
and the Philippines.  In particular, President Obama reiterated that 
bilateral alliances should be based on equality and mutual respect, 
being mindful of Japan's Democratic government, which claims it will 
seek to stand on equal footing with the U.S. 
 
President Obama made his position clear about North Korea.  He said, 
"The path for North Korea to realize this (new) future is clear: a 
return to the Six-Party Talks; upholding previous commitments, 
including a return to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty; and the 
full and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula."  He 
reaffirmed that the U.S. will resolve the North Korean nuclear issue 
through close cooperation with Six-Party members and will achieve a 
nuclear-free North Korea. 
 
President Obama announced, "As an Asia-Pacific nation, the U.S. 
expects to be involved in the discussions that shape the future of 
this region."   In particular, he said that the U.S. looks forward 
to engaging with the East Asia Summit (EAS), which involves 16 
countries including the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
 
SEOUL 00001811  005 OF 009 
 
 
(ASEAN) members and the ROK, China, India, Australia and New 
Zealand.  This shows that the U.S. is willing to participate in 
discussions on the East Asia community through the EAS.  It is a 
good sign that the U.S. clarified its position on discussions on 
East Asia's integration.  Obama stressed, however, "One of the 
important lessons this recession has taught us is the limits of 
depending primarily on American consumers and Asian exports to drive 
growth."  The ROK and China, which depend heavily on exports, should 
pay special attention to this remark. 
 
 
IT IS TIME FOR N. KOREA TO AWAKE TO A "DIFFERENT FUTURE IF IT 
ABANDONS ITS NUCLEAR AMBITIONS" 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 16, 2009, Page 35) 
 
U.S. President Barack Obama said during his November 14 speech in 
Tokyo that if North Korea abandons its nuclear development, "the 
U.S. is prepared to offer North Korea a different future."  With 
U.S.-North Korea bilateral dialogue ahead, this signals that 
Washington is not only willing to resolve conflicts with the North 
but is also (prepared) to provide massive aid to the communist 
state.  President Obama emphasized in an earlier interview with 
Yonhap News, "By taking irreversible steps towards the complete 
elimination of its nuclear program, North Korea will be following 
the peaceful path towards security and respect."  He presented a way 
for the North to get out of a total crisis. 
 
President Obama's remarks virtually herald the resolution of the 
nuclear issue by the leaders of the ROK, the U.S., China and Japan. 
After visiting Japan and Singapore, President Obama started his 
three-day trip to China yesterday.  He will visit the ROK on 
November 18-19.  President Obama said, "President Lee and I are in 
full agreement on the need to achieve a comprehensive resolution of 
the nuclear problem."  Now that discussions with Japan are over, the 
remaining task for Obama is to coordinate stances with China. 
Saying, "The U.S. does not seek to contain China, nor does a deeper 
relationship with China mean a weakening of our bilateral 
alliances," President Obama recognized China as a partner for 
cooperation.  Chinese President Hu Jintao is highly likely to 
support President Obama's "carrot" policy toward the North. 
 
While talking about Asia-focused policy, President Obama mentioned 
North Korea policy.  Born in Hawaii and raised in Indonesia, 
President Obama described himself as America's first Pacific 
President.  This carries all the more weight because President Obama 
presented the resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue as part 
of his efforts to carry out Asia-focused policy.  He also mentioned 
"stick" measures.  He said that the U.S. will not be cowed by North 
Korea's nuclear development threats and added, "So long as these 
weapons exist, the United States will maintain a strong and 
effective nuclear deterrent that guarantees the defense of our 
allies - including South Korea and Japan." 
 
It is up to North Korea whether it remains in isolation by holding 
on to its nuclear weapons or embraces a new future.  North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il should take President Obama's statements 
seriously and make a wise choice.  Although North Korea staged 
military provocations in the Yellow Sea in addition to the second 
nuclear test, the door to dialogue is still open.  If the North 
rejects Obama's offer for dialogue, the international community will 
have no choice but to take stick measures. 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
EXPERTS CITE WHY KOREANS REALLY SHUN U.S. CARS 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 16, 2009, Page 3) 
 
By Reporters Chang Kang-myung and Kim Sang-woon 
 
"Korea must further open up its car market to the U.S.  All we're 
asking for is for our own car companies to be able to compete on a 
level playing field in the Korean market."  This is what U.S. Trade 
 
SEOUL 00001811  006 OF 009 
 
 
Representative Ron Kirk told a dinner meeting of the Korea-U.S. 
Business Council Nov. 5. 
 
"Korea has been bashing foreign cars by mobilizing non-tariff 
barriers.  The Korea-U.S. free trade agreement must be revised." 
This is what 12 U.S. senators and Congressmen said in a letter to 
Kirk Nov. 6. 
 
Many Korean experts say these comments show U.S.  ignorance of the 
Korean market at the same time as  its attempt to appeal to American 
voters. 
 
Why American cars are unpopular in Korea 
 
In a survey of 27 experts in Korea conducted by the industrial news 
desk of Dong-a Ilbo, 18 said U.S. cars are unpopular in Korea 
because of "problems with products."  In particular, they noted that 
the overall quality of American cars is poor and that they are too 
big with low fuel efficiency.  Kim Ki-chan, Chairman of the Korea 
Academy of Motor Industry, said, "American carmakers have focused on 
financing rather than the products themselves," adding, "Lack of 
competitiveness at plants can be seen in the vehicles." 
 
Many critics also said American cars do not cater to Korean tastes. 
As for luxury vehicles, Koreans like a stately and dignified look, 
but American cars are seen as too decorative by Koreans.  For 
example, a U.S. undersecretary-level official reportedly said, "Why 
would a vehicle unpopular in the U.S. sell well in Korea," after 
hearing about an American model popular in Korea while visiting 
Seoul. 
 
In a survey of general Korean consumers, 16.8 percent cited poor 
design as why American cars do not sell well in Korea.  Another 18.7 
percent said they would buy other cars even if American models were 
sold 10 percent cheaper, citing poor design. 
 
Notably, American cars with poor gas mileage have grown less popular 
around the world in the wake of the global financial crisis amid 
high oil prices last year and this year.  Hyundai Motor and Kia 
Motors, with their strong lineup of smaller vehicles, have made 
great strides abroad, after General Motors and Chrysler underwent 
bankruptcy protection and Ford struggled due to a managerial crisis. 
 
 
No notable trade barriers 
 
Most experts also brushed aside the notion of trade barriers in 
Korea.  On trade barriers other than tariffs, if any, nine (33.3 
percent) cited car standards and regulations such as  safety and 
environmental (concerns), while 10 (37 percent) noted consumer taste 
and public sentiment.  Kang Cheol-goo, Director at the Korea 
Automobile Manufacturers Association, said, "Since countries have 
different climates and driving cultures, the standards and 
regulations for vehicle safety and the environment should be 
different," adding, "When Korean automakers export cars, they also 
meet the standards of the importing country. These cannot be 
considered trade barriers." 
 
As for consumer taste and public sentiment, another expert said, 
"They could be an obstacle to selling American cars in Korea, but I 
wonder if we can call it a trade barrier."  "Should the Korean 
government go so far as to stage a campaign to promote purchase of 
U.S. cars?"  An import car industry source said, "In the past, there 
were practical barriers, including a ban on advertisements for 
imported cars," adding, "I don't see any notable barriers other than 
tariffs."  Four experts (14.8 percent) cited no notable trade 
barriers. 
 
Sales of European, Japanese cars surging 
 
Critics also said that even if there are trade barriers in the 
Korean auto market, European and Japanese cars are seeing their 
market shares rise.  According to the Korea Automobile Importers and 
Distributors Association, imported vehicle sales in Korea increased 
 
SEOUL 00001811  007 OF 009 
 
 
from 19,481 units in 2003, or 1.9 percent of the market, to 61,648 
last year, or 6 percent.  Imported vehicle sales have continued to 
set new records every year since 2002. 
 
The sales volume of European cars in Korea increased from 12,535 
units (1.2 percent) in 2003 to 32,756 (3.2 percent) last year.  Over 
the same period, that of Japanese cars surged from 3,774 (0.4 
percent) to 21,912 (2.1 percent) units.  The sales volume of 
American cars marginally increased from 3,172 (0.3 percent) to 6,980 
units (0.7 percent) over the same period.  The new BMW series sold 
1,578 vehicles in Korea from January through October this year, the 
fourth largest by volume in a global market.  The same tariff rate 
is levied on all import vehicles. 
 
Except for GM-Daewoo Auto &amp; Technology's vehicles, U.S. car brands 
in Korea brought through official import channels are Chrysler, Jeep 
and Dodge imported by Chrysler Korea, Ford and Lincoln by Ford 
Korea, and Cadillac and Saab by GM Korea. 
 
 
FULL TEXT OF OBAMA'S INTERVIEW WITH YONHAP NEWS AGENCY 
(Yonhap News, November 13, 2009) 
 
The following is the full text of U.S. President Barack Obama's 
interview with Yonhap News Agency. 
 
(President Obama) I am very much looking forward to my trip to Asia 
and visiting Seoul and meeting with President Lee (Myung-bak). 
President Lee and I have established a very strong working 
relationship, which I think is quite evident in our close 
coordination on global issues, particularly on North Korea.  So let 
me first start with your question on North Korea. 
 
(Yonhap) Mr. President.  What is your view of North Korea's nuclear 
and missile programs?  Are you prepared to hold bilateral talks with 
North Korea?  Also, do you think the Six-Party Talks will work to 
denuclearize the North or do you have any other solutions in mind if 
the talks fail? 
 
(President Obama) North Korea's nuclear and missile capabilities are 
a grave concern, not only to the Republic of Korea and the United 
States, but to the international community.  This is an issue that 
President Lee and I have discussed in depth and we will hold 
consultations on this and other subjects in Seoul later this month. 
President Lee and I are in full agreement on the need to achieve a 
comprehensive resolution of the nuclear, missile, and proliferation 
problems, and cooperation between our two governments is extremely 
close.  We believe the Six-Party Talks are the best framework for 
reaching peaceful resolution and that the September 2005 Joint 
Statement clearly lays out the goals we must achieve.  We are open 
to a bilateral meeting as part of the Six-Party process if that will 
lead to an expeditious resumption of the denuclearization 
negotiations. 
 
North Korea's attempt to acquire weapons of mass destruction and the 
means to deliver them is destabilizing and represents a threat to 
peace and security.  This is why the United Nations Security Council 
adopted strong measures under Resolution 1874 and why the UN members 
states are enforcing the provisions of those resolutions.  Pursuit 
of nuclear weapons and missile delivery systems makes North Korea 
and the region less secure, whereas negotiations in the Six-Party 
process to achieve the peaceful denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula can bring security and prosperity to North Korea and the 
region. 
 
This is the choice that North Korea faces.  North Korea has the 
opportunity to move towards acceptance by the international 
community if it will comply with its international obligations and 
live up to its own commitments.  By taking irreversible steps 
towards the complete elimination of its nuclear program, North Korea 
will be following the peaceful path towards security and respect. 
 
(Yonhap) You supported South Korea's bid to host the G-20 summit in 
November next year.  What kind of role do you expect South Korea to 
 
SEOUL 00001811  008 OF 009 
 
 
play in the G-20 forum? 
 
(President Obama) South Korea's emergence as host of the G-20 
leaders meeting next year is the latest evidence that South Korea is 
playing an important leadership role on the world stage.  President 
Lee has done a superb job steering South Korea's economy through the 
economic downturn and now on an upward trajectory, and I am looking 
forward to his continued strong leadership in the Asia Pacific 
region on the economic policy front. 
 
South Korea's hosting of the G-20 next year is also a prime example 
of the economic success it has had in a relatively short period of 
time and its movement into the ranks of the world's leading 
economies.  South Korea's success serves as a prime example for 
still developing economies and its hosting of the G-20 next year is 
demonstrative of the global leadership role that it is undertaking. 
I am pleased that South Korea has agreed to host the G-20 meeting 
next year and the US will help support their efforts to ensure that 
the meeting is a success. 
 
 
SURVEY: 73 PERCENT OF RESPONDENTS SAY THEY "WILL NOT BUY AMERICAN 
CARS EVEN IF PRICES FALL 10 PERCENT" 
(Dong-a Ilbo, November 16, 2009, Front Page) 
 
By Reporters Chang Kang-myung and Kim Sang-woon 
 
With U.S. President Barack Obama's visit to the ROK drawing nearer, 
some U.S. lawmakers argue, "The ROK should open its doors wider to 
U.S. vehicles."  It has been found, however, that ROK consumers and 
experts on commerce and automobiles believe, "The reason why U.S. 
vehicles do not sell well in the ROK is due to their lack of 
competitiveness."  Furthermore, seven out of ten ROK consumers 
answered that even if U.S. car prices fell by 10 percent, they would 
still purchase Korean, Japanese or European cars, instead of U.S. 
vehicles. 
 
The industrial news desk of Dong-a Ilbo and EnClean.com, a SK Energy 
portal site, conducted a survey of 513 members of the Internet site 
by e-mail on November 10-11.  According to the results, 49.4 percent 
of the respondents cited problems with products - such as design 
(16.8 percent), fuel efficiency (12.7 percent), functions (7.4 
percent) and brand image (7.2 percent) - as why U.S. cars do not 
sell well in the ROK.  90.8 percent of those surveyed possess their 
own cars, and among them, 41.2 percent have mid- and large-size cars 
with engine displacement of more than 2,000cc. 
 
A total of 72.9 percent of the respondents said that even if U.S. 
car prices dropped by 10 percent, they would still buy Korean, 
European or Japanese vehicles.  Based on this result, it can be 
predicted that even if the current eight-percent tariff on U.S. 
autos is eliminated, their sales in the ROK will not increase much. 
The car import industry estimates that even if the ROK-U.S. Free 
Trade Agreement (FTA) comes into force and removes tariffs on U.S. 
cars, their actual market prices will drop by only 4 to 6 percent. 
Lee Hang-koo, a researcher at the Korea Institute for Industrial 
Economics and Trade, pointed out, "Even in the U.S., Asian vehicles 
rank high in consumer satisfaction surveys." 
 
Regarding the auto section of the ROK-U.S. FTA, 12 (44.4 percent) 
out of 27 experts of automobiles and commerce, including 12 
officials in the car import industry, said, "The levels of market 
opening in the ROK and the U.S. are similar," and 9 people (33.3 
percent) responded, "The ROK's market opening level is higher." 
Only two answered, "The U.S.'s market opening level is higher." 
 
Last year, the ROK exported over 590,000 assembled cars to the U.S. 
while the U.S. exported only 8,864 assembled cars to the ROK.  The 
share of U.S. cars in the ROK market has remained below 1 percent 
for several years. 
 
Some experts argue that domestic sales by GM Daewoo, the automaker 
in which General Motors has a 70.1 percent stake, should be counted 
into the U.S.'s share of the ROK auto market.  In the ROK market 
 
SEOUL 00001811  009 OF 009 
 
 
alone, GM Daewoo sold over 110,000 cars (market share:  10.1 
percent) last year.  When Hyundai-Kia Automotive Group's 6 to 8 
percent market share in the U.S. is reported, the company's output 
in Alabama is counted in.  Lee Sang-ho, a professor of economics at 
Sejong University, said, "Locally produced GM Daewoo (vehicles 
should be included in the sales of U.S. automakers," adding, "The 
ROKG should actively publicize this." 
 
 
STEPHENS 
</file>