^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  분류  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  09SEOUL653  |  2009-04-22 07:07  |  기밀  |  주한 미국 대사관 |  {{tag>KS KN PGOV PREL }}  |

====== 제 목: 한국 민주주의의 도전: 야당의 제도화 ======
기 밀 SEOUL 000653 
국방부망 배포((번역 주: SIPDIS, Siprnet Distribution))
행정명령 12958: 비밀해제: 04/22/2019 
태그: KS (([Korea (South)])), KN (([Korea (North)])), PGOV (([Internal Governmental Affairs])), PREL (([External Political Relations])) 
제 목: 한국 민주주의의 도전: 야당의 제도화
참조: [[09seoul313|가. SEOUL 00313]] [[09seoul550|나. SEOUL 00550]] 
분류자: 정치 참사관 조셉 윤.((번역 주:POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun.))  근거 1.4 (b,d).
번역자: PoirotKr (번역주: 트위터 사용자 이름) --- //[[poirotkr@wikileaks-kr.org|Micheal H. Rhee]] 2011/10/05 03:57//

===== 요약=====
1. (기밀) 요약: 개원부터 언쟁으로 얼룩지고 있는 제18대 국회는 재삼재사(再三再四) 비효율적이라는 게 증명되고 있음에 더해 입법부 기능에 대한 국민의 비관적 시각이 만연해 있다는 문제에 직면해 있다. 거듭 입법 절차를 마비시키고 있는 정당 사이 갈등은 기실 입법 과정에서 야당의 역할을 제대로 정립하자는 거대 담론에 일부이다. 이 담론이 국회의원 사이 논의가 시작된 지는 얼마 안 됐다. 합의를 중시하는 한국 문화와 강력한 다수결주의 구조에 갇혀 있는 현 정치 제도 간의 이분법이 이 문제에서 중요한 원인이다. 한국민은 의사 결정 시 큰 틀에서 합의를 원하고 있고 야당은 그런 합의를 이룰 자격이 있다고 분명하게 느끼고 있다. 그런 관계로 국회 파행이 빈번해진다. 한국 정치 과정 속에 효율성을 더 확대할 수 있는 개혁안이 존재한다. 임기 제한, 비례대표제 강화, 국민참여경선, 대통령 중임제, 토론 종결 규칙의 변경 등이 해당한다. 국회 내 진전이 없어 낙담한 정치가들은 모두 개혁을 부르짖고 있지만, 그들 자신의 권력을 저해할까 두려운 나머지 개혁안 실천을 꺼리고 있다. 전문가 대부분은 권세를 누리고 있는 한국 정치가들이 당분간은 진정한 개혁을 실천할 가능성을 낮게 보고 있다. 이는 결국 정당 사이에 충돌에 따른 불완전하고 임시방편의 타협안을 의미한다. 요약 끝.
===== 합의에 대한 요구 =====
2. (기밀) 한국의 국회는 지난 6월 개원한 이후 정국이 혼란에 빠져있다. 한나라당 소속 대통령이고 한나라당이 원내 다수당이라 한미 FTA와 같은 특히 미국의 관심사를 비롯해 광범위한 법안의 통과가 쉬울 거라는 추측은 닥쳐보니 바보 같은 낙관론이었다. 한국의 양대 정당인 한나라당과 민주당은 지난 11월 난장판 국회를 되풀이할까 걱정한 나머지 가까스로 중요한 한미 관계 법안 통과에 더해([[09seoul313|참조 전문 가]]) 시급한 경제 개혁 법안의 통과를 앞당기기로 3월 초 합의를 이루었다.

3. (기밀) 언뜻 보기에 정국의 혼란 상태는 외부 관측통으로선 헷갈리는 것이다. 안정적인 원내 다수당인(294석 중 170석) 한나라당과 권력을 공유하자는 민주당의 요구나 의사 방해도 지켜보는 이를 어리둥절하게 만들지만, 한국민이 합의 기반의 국회 운영에 찬성한다는 점도 당황스럽기는 매한가지다. 1월 언론 조사에 의하면 58.7%의 응답자가 논란을 사는 법안에 대해 양 라이벌인 정당의 합의를 원하는 것으로 나왔다. 한국사회여론연구소가 시행한 1월 여론조사에서 72%의 응답자가 입법 과정이 늦어지더라도, 여야 사이 합의를 원하는 것으로 나왔다. 이런 여론의 향배에도 한나라당은 여전히 야당과의 타협을 꺼리고 있다. 3월 초 제한적인 숫자의 법안을 본회의에서 통과시키겠다는 합의는 일회성 임시방편적 합의로 누가 봐도 순조로운 국회 운영은 아니다.

4. (기밀) 그러나 어찌 보면 절차의 붕괴로도 보이지만, 한국식 민주주의가 다음 단계로 나아가는 방증일 공산이 매우 크다. 야당을 정책 결정 과정에 참여시키라는 요구는 민주주의 제도 안에서 원내 다수당의 권력 남용에 대한 우려를 반영하고 있다. 한국민은 식민지 역사와 독재 정권의 거치면서 상처를 입었다. 그런 한국민은 지나치게 강한 중앙 정부에 대한 두려움이 뿌리 깊이 내재되어 있다. 또한, 한국민은 개인의 권리를 보호하겠다는 의지도 있고 국정 운영과 정치 과정 속에서 제 역할을 하겠다는 기대도 커지고 있다. 이러한 보호 의식을 국가 차원에서 통합한다면 어떤 선택이 될지가 현재 국회에서 논의되는 핵심 사안이다.

===== 다수결주의 대항 합의 기반 민주주의 =====
5. (기밀) 현행 한국 헌법은 1948년 공화국 수립 이후 열 차례 수정을 거치면서 강한 행정부를 염두에 두고 있었지만, 박정희(1963-1979)와 전두환(1980-1988)같은 전제적 지도자를 금지하는 까닭에 대통령의 임기는 5년 단임제이다. 다수결주의 제도에 기초한 국회가 큰 권력과 권한을 행사한다고 생각되지 않는다. 그러나 입법부의 역할이 꾸준히 커지고 있는데 이는 민주주의 확대에 대한 사회적 요구를 반영하고 있다. 이러한 혼합형 제도의 틀 속에서 한국 야당의 역할을 제대로 정립하려는 시도가 이뤄지고 있다.

===== 야당이 열외 취급을 당하는 요인들 =====
6. (기밀) 임기 불일치. 다수결주의 제도의 장점 중 하나가 유권자 표심의 소소한 변화로 상대 정당이 집권할 수 있다는 점이다. 한국에서 대통령은 5년 임기로 선출되고 단원제 국회는 4년 임기로 선출된다. 작년에 한국의 짧은 민주주의 역사상 처음으로 양쪽의 임기가 맞아 떨어졌다. 새 대통령 선출되고 단지 4개월 지난 시점에 완전히 새로운 국회가 구성되었다. 결국, 적어도 4년 동안은 한나라당이 유리한 권력 구도가 자리하게 될 것이다. 이는 한나라당에 대해 어떤 종류의 의미 있는 국민적 심판이 가해질 기회가 국민에게 주어지지 않는 것이다.

7. (기밀) 보스 정치. 대부분의 다수결주의 제도에서는 특히 대표자인 국회 의원과 유권자 간의 유대가 돈독하다. 왜냐면 소선거구제에서 선거구에 대한 봉사에 상당히 유리한 혜택이 있기 때문이다. 이런 돈독한 유대 관계 속에서 시민은 국정 운영에 대한 목소리를 낼 기회를 제공함에 더해 선출된 국회의원이 선거구 현안에 대해 책임을 물게 된다. 한국의 경우 정치 정당이 여전히 인물에 좌지우지(左之右之)되고 계파에 대한 맹목적인 충성심을 요구한다. 결과적으로 정치인의 성공은 선거구 봉사보다는 당내 인맥에 더 의존적일 수밖에 없다. 이와 아울러 정당은 어떤 후보가 어느 지역구에 출마할 것인지 결정하고 종종 후보를 아무 연고가 없는 지역에 입후보시킨다. 이런 가변성은 선거구를 대표하는 의원들과 지역사회와의 유대가 약하거나 거의 소멸하는 결과를 낳는다.

8. (기밀) 신뢰의 결여. 다수결주의 정부의 장점은 효율적인 경향이 있다는 것이다. 승자가 싹쓸이하는 제도는 승자와 패자를 선명하게 구분 짓는다. 한국에서 한나라당이 국회와 행정부 권력을 장악하고 있는 것은 두말할 나위 없지만, 국민은 해당 권력을 견제할만한 제도가 제 기능을 갖추고 있는지 거의 신뢰하지 못한다. 한국은 오래전에 (그리고 최근에) 경험한 권위주의 정부와 짧은 민주주의 역사는 대중들 사이에 근본적인 불신의 결과를 낳았고 독재 정권으로 회귀할까 끊임없이 두려움을 갖고 있다. 이러한 공포가 10년 진보 정권 이후 권위주의 정부의 유물인 보수 세력들이 재집권했기 때문이다. 당연히 자유주의 세력(리버럴)과 진보 세력은 이명박 대통령의 일거수일투족을 그들이 보기에 힘겨웠던 옛날로 시간을 거꾸로 돌리려는 시도로 여기고 있다.

===== 제시된 해결책 =====
9. (기밀) 대사관 학계 연락선(정보원)은 국민은 합의 기반의 접근에 찬성한다고 지적하지만, 어떻게 야당을 제도화할지에 대한 국회 토론이 이제 막 시작했을 뿐이다. 4월 초에 한나라당 초선의원 모임인 민본 21은 국회 마찰은 줄이고 야당에 더 많은 권한을 부여하는 내용의 여러 제안을 내놓았다.

10. (민감하지만 미분류) 의사진행방해. 민주당 국회의원들은―주로 당 대표인 정세균과 전 외교부장관 송민순([[09seoul550|참조 문서 나.]])—의사진행방해 제도를 요구하고 있다. 이 제안은 민본 21의 의원들도 지지한 것이다. 의사진행 방해가 이뤄지려면 국회 정원 4분 1 의원의 지지만이 필요하다. 이는 소수 정당이 본회의 연설을 연장함으로써 입법 절차를 합법적으로 방해할 수 있는 수단을 제공할 것이다. 다만 국회의원 4분의 3의 동의에 따라 의사진행 방해를 제지하기 직전까지만 해당한다. 이런 제도는 야당에 입법을 저지할 수 있는 반대 목소리를 허용함으로써 폭력에 의지하지 않고 토론의 증진을 요구하는 것이다.

11. (민감하지만 미분류) 국회 의장의 권한 확대. 민본21에 속한 의원들은 각 의원이 입법 방향을 잘 설정할 수 있도록 국회의장 권한을 강화하는 것을 지지한다. 대사관 연락선(정보원) 한 명은 각 정당이 자기 정당의 이익을 대변하려는 욕구가 협상력을 저해하는 요인으로 작용한다. 이 현상은 게임 이론에서 “죄수의 딜레마”라고 불려지고 있다. 국회 의장이 합의를 중재해서 반대론자들의 주장을 펼치고 상대 당의 권한이 반영되는 타협안을 보장해야 한다. 민본 21은 의장의 임기를 현재의 2년에서 4년으로 확대하는 것은 제안했는데, 이는 국회 의장이 다음 국회의원 선거에 출마하지 않도록 하는 관례화해서 정치적 중립성을 제고한다는 것이다. 그러나 이런 제도는 일개 개인의 신뢰성에 지나치게 의존하는 것이다.

12. (기밀) 정당의 민주화. 한나라당 의원들은 정당 내부에 민주적인 선거 입후보자 공천 절차를 제안했다. 현재 상황은 당 지도부가 불투명한 절차를 통해 어느 지역구에 어떤 후보가 출마할 수 있을지 결정한다. 2008년 4월 공천 과정에서 당의 보스와의 인맥이 다른 무엇보다도 당의 축복을 받는 데 중요하다는 점이 분명히 드러났다. 덧붙여서 정치인들은 지도자들의 눈 밖에 나지 않으려면 당론에 따라 표결할 수밖에 없다. “보스 정치”를 일소하면 입후보자들이 정당의 지도부가 아닌 그들 지역구에 충실할 수 있어 시민들이 의견이 지역구 대표의 기표 속에 반영될 것이다. 그러나 당내 최고 실력자들이 자신의 권력을 순순히 포기할 공산은 희박하므로 공천 개혁이 어렵다는 것이다.

===== 가능한 추가적 해결책 =====
13. (기밀) 몇몇 관측통들은 소수의 의견을 반영할 여지나 최소한 한국 민주주의 절차상에 시민의 목소리를 강화하는 등 한국 민주주의의 다른 문제를 해결하는 방안을 내놓았다.

14. (기밀) 임기제한 개혁이 노력은 보통 헌법을 개정하여 대통령 임기를 4년 중임을 허용토록 하자는 내용을 담고 있다. 이런 제도를 제도화함에 따라 국회 임기 중간에 대통령 선거를 개최해 국정 운영에 대한 사실상의 국민투표를 정기적으로 개최할기회를 유권자에게 제공하는 것이다.

15. (기밀) 비례대표제. 한국은 이미 직접대표제와 비례대표제를 혼합한 선거방식으로 더 많은 여성이 국회에 진출하는 데 매우 효과적인 메커니즘이다. 어떤 이들은 지역주의를 극복하는 수단으로 확장된 중선거구제 방식의 비례대표선거구제를 지지한다. 예를 들면, 한나라당이 장악한 영남 지역 다수 유권자가 한나라당에 표를 던지더라도 각 당의 득표율에 기초한 의석 할당 방식으로 민주당 후보가 당선될 가능성을 만들 수 있다. 비례대표제는 국회 의원의 다양성을 더 많이 확보하는 등 상당히 효율적인 수단으로 판명돼 있다. 비례대표제에서는 단일 정당 정부가 구성되기 아주 힘든 선거 제도로 다수결주의에 따른 우려를 완화하여 소수의 목소리를 더 많이 의사 결정 과정에 반영하도록 하는 것이다. 그러나 불리한 측면도 있다. 이런 제도는 국정 운영의 비효율성이 더해지고 소수 정당 결성을 양산한다. 또한, 그들에게 더 많은 권한을 제공하면서 시스템에 불안정성이 유입될 수 있다.

16. (기밀) 순전한 다수결원칙의 위험성을 피하기 위한 그 밖의 일반적인 접근에 대한 논의는 한국에서 흔하지 않다. 오랜 기간에 걸쳐 법치주의 원칙을 강화하면 사람들이 균형 있고 공정한 법의 적용 여부를 확신하도록 도움을 줄 것이다. 그럼으로써 정부에 대한 신뢰를 증진할 수 있다. 가끔 선택 사항이긴 하지만, 심각히 논의되지 않는 권한의 분권화도 중앙 정부의 권력을 지역 단위로 양도함으로써 국민 자신의 문제에 대해 더 많은 목소리를 내도록 하는 것이다. 국민투표의 사용과 정당의 거부권 행사는 또 다른 방식으로 일부 민주주의 국가에서 다수 의견에 균형을 잡도록 사용하고 있지만, 어떤 것도 가까운 미래에 수용될 것 같지는 않다.

===== 논 평 =====
17. (기밀) 한국 사람들은 작년 겨울 국회 내부 주먹다짐과 폭력 사태에 대한 보도가 세계 곳곳에 방영돼서 망신을 당했다고 인정하고 있다. 국민은 더 많은 합의의 정치로 나아가고 특히 야당의 역할을 잘 정립하기 위해 입법과 선거 규칙에 변화에 찬성한다. 그러나 늘 그렇듯이 가장 큰 문제는 정치가 자신이다. 이들은 각기 자신이 속한 정당의 정치력을 저해할 수도 있는 전면적인 개혁을 단행할 공산은 크지 않다. 대신에 정당 지도부는 자신들의 정치적 자본을 어려운 제도 개혁에 사용하기보다는 임시응변 식 합의를 선택해서 주요 법률의 점진적인(다소 느린) 발전을 기하는 선택을 할 것이다. 이것은 국회에서 들쑥날쑥한 입법 행위를 의미하며 장기적 해결책을 기대하기 힘들게 되는 것이다.
//스티븐스//
[[https://sites.google.com/site/poirotkr/15/09seoul653|포와로 탐정의 번역]] © 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다.
===== 바깥 고리 =====
  - [[http://h21.hani.co.kr/arti/cover/cover_general/37963.html|기획 연재_ 지금, 여기 왜 합의제 민주주인가?
① 대립적 양당 정치의 오늘]] //한겨레21//
  - [[http://h21.hani.co.kr/arti/society/society_general/38007.html|기획 연재_ 지금, 여기 왜 합의제 민주주인가? ② 선진 복지국가의 합의제 민주주의]] //한겨레21//
  - [[http://h21.hani.co.kr/arti/politics/politics_general/38059.html?recopick=6|기획 연재_ 지금, 여기 왜 합의제 민주주인가? ③ 한국식 합의제 민주주의로 가는 길]] //한겨레21//
  - [[http://www.prforum.kr/press|비례대표제포럼, 기사 및 칼럼]] //비례대표제포럼//

===== 원본 다운로드 =====
<file rtf 09SEOUL653.rtf>
C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000653 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/22/2019 
TAGS: KS [Korea (South)], KN [Korea (North)], PGOV [Internal Governmental Affairs],
PREL [External Political Relations] 
SUBJECT: KOREA'S NEXT DEMOCRATIC CHALLENGE: 
INSTITUTIONALIZING THE OPPOSITION 
 
REF: A. SEOUL 00313 
     B. SEOUL 00550 
 
Classified By: POL Joseph Y. Yun.  Reasons 1.4 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: The 18th National Assembly, plagued by 
bickering since its inception, has proved its inefficiency 
time and again and is faced with widespread public pessimism 
about the legislature's functionality.  The inter-party 
conflict that has so frequently ground proceedings to a halt 
is, in fact, part of a larger debate about the proper role of 
the opposition in the legislative process -- a debate that is 
just starting to take shape among lawmakers.  An important 
cause of the problem is the dichotomy between Korean culture, 
which values consensus, and the current political system, 
which is strongly majoritarian in its structure.  The Korean 
public overwhelmingly wants greater consensus in decision 
making and the opposition parties clearly feel entitled to 
this power -- hence the frequent breakdown in the National 
Assembly.  There are reform proposals that could bring more 
efficiency to the Korean political process, including term 
limits, enhanced proportional representation, primaries, two 
terms for president, and changes in cloture rules. 
Politicians, frustrated with lack of progress in the National 
Assembly, all talk about reform, but are reluctant to pursue 
them for fear of undermining their own power.  Most experts 
see little likelihood that powerful Korean politician will 
pursue serious reform anytime soon, which means more 
inter-party clashes accompanied by incomplete, ad-hoc 
compromises.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------------- 
The Call for Consensus 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) The Korean National Assembly has been in a state of 
disarray since taking office last June.  The assumption that 
a Grand National Party (GNP) president and a GNP majority in 
parliament would facilitate passage of a wide-ranging set of 
bills, including some -- like the KORUS FTA -- that were of 
particular interest to the U.S., now seems foolishly 
optimistic.  Anxious not to repeat the brawling spectacle of 
last December, the two major parties -- the GNP and the 
Democratic Party (DP) -- managed to come to an agreement in 
early March that facilitated passage of important bilateral 
legislation (reftel A) as well as much-needed economic reform 
measures. 
 
¶3.  (C) At first glance, the disarray has been perplexing to 
outside observers.  The DP's obstructionism and demand for 
power sharing with the GNP, which holds a comfortable 
majority (170 out of 294 seats), is almost as mystifying as 
the public's increasing support for a more consensus-based 
approach in the National Assembly.  According to a media 
survey in January, 58.7 percent of respondents wanted an 
agreement with rival parties over controversial legislation. 
In a separate January poll conducted by the Korea Society 
Opinion Institute (KSOI) 72 percent of respondents wanted 
agreement between ruling and opposition parties even if that 
slowed legislation.  Despite the public's preference, the GNP 
is still reluctant to compromise with the opposition parties. 
 The agreement that resulted in the plenary's passage of a 
limited number of bills in early March was a one-off, ad-hoc 
deal and in no way presages smoother sailing. 
 
¶4.  (C) What seems to be a broken process, however, is very 
likely evidence of the next stage in Korea's democratic 
development.  The call to incorporate the opposition into the 
policy decision-making process reflects concern about the 
unchecked power of the majority in democratic systems. 
Koreans, scarred by a colonial history and the authoritarian 
governments that followed, have a deep-seated fear of an 
overly strong central government, a commitment to the 
protection of individual rights, and a growing expectation 
that the people will play a role in the country's political 
and governing processes.  If and how the nation as a whole 
chooses to incorporate these protections is the essence of 
the current debate in the National Assembly. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Majoritarian vs. Consensus-based Democracies 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) The current Korean constitution -- in its tenth 
incarnation since the founding of the Republic in 1948 -- was 
intended to provide a strong executive, but prohibit 
authoritarian leaders like Park Chung-hee (1963-1979) and 
Chun Doo-hwan (1980-1988); hence the single, five-year term 
for president.  The National Assembly was based on a 
majoritarian system, but was not supposed to yield much power 
or authority.  However, the role of the legislature increased 
steadily, reflecting the society's demand for more democracy. 
 It is within this hybrid system that Korea's political 
opposition is attempting to define its proper role. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Factors That Have Sidelined the Opposition 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (C) Coincidental Terms.  Typically, one of the strengths 
of majoritarian systems is that a relatively small swing in 
the electorate can bring the other party into power.  In 
Korea the President is elected to a five-year term and the 
unicameral National Assembly is elected to a four-year term. 
Last year these terms aligned so that, for the first time in 
Korea's short democratic history, a mere four months after 
electing a new president, the country also elected an 
entirely new National Assembly.  Consequently, the current 
power alignment favoring the GNP will be in place for at 
least four years, without the public having an opportunity to 
pass any kind of meaningful judgment on the party's 
performance. 
 
¶7.  (C) Boss politics.  In most majoritarian systems there is 
a particularly close relationship between representatives and 
constituents, because there is a significant incentive for 
constituency service in single-member districts.  This close 
relationship provides citizens with a voice in the nation's 
affairs and holds elected officials accountable to 
constituency concerns.  In Korea's case, political parties 
are still highly personality driven and demand almost 
complete factional loyalty.  Consequently, a politician's 
success is more dependent on personal connections within the 
party than on constituent service.  Additionally, the party 
decides which candidates will run for election in which 
district, often moving candidates into districts where they 
have no personal connection.  This fluidity results in 
representatives with weak or no ties to the community they 
represent. 
 
¶8.  (C) Lack of trust.  One strength of majoritarian 
governments is that they tend to be more efficient -- the 
winner-takes-all system creates clear winners and losers.  In 
Korea there is no doubt that the GNP holds the reigns of 
power in both the National Assembly and in the executive 
office, however the public has very little trust in the 
system's ability to check that power.  Korea's long (and 
recent) experience with authoritarian governments and short 
history with democracy have resulted in a fundamental 
mistrust among the populace and a constant fear of a return 
to an authoritarian regime.  This fear is particularly 
pervasive now because, after 10 years of liberal rule, the 
conservatives -- and heirs to the authoritarian governments' 
legacy -- are back in power.  Not surprising, liberals and 
progressives see every move of President Lee Myung-bak as an 
attempt to turn the clock back to what they view as the bad 
old days. 
 
------------------ 
Proposed Solutions 
------------------ 
 
¶9.  (C) Embassy contacts in academia have noted the public's 
support for a consensus-based approach, but debate over how 
to institutionalize the opposition is only just beginning in 
the National Assembly.  In early April, a group of first-term 
GNP lawmakers called Minbon 21 floated several proposals that 
would likely reduce friction in the National Assembly and 
give the opposition more power. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Filibuster.  DP lawmakers -- most notably party 
Chief Chung Sye-kyun and former Foreign Minister Song 
 
Min-soon (reftel B) -- have called for a filibuster system, a 
proposal that the Minbon 21 lawmakers also endorsed.  Only 
one-fourth of the lawmakers would need to support the 
filibuster, which would provide a legal means for minority 
parties to obstruct legislative proceedings by extending a 
floor speech until three-fifths of lawmakers consented to 
break the filibuster.  Such a system would allow opposition 
voices to block legislation and demand more debate without 
resorting to violence. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) More Power to the Speaker.  The Minbon 21 members 
supported strengthening the authority of the National 
Assembly speaker, enabling that individual to better steer 
legislature.  One Embassy contact noted that the individual 
parties' propensity to act in their own best interest serves 
as a disincentive to negotiation -- a phenomenon referred to 
in game theory as a "prisoner's dilemma."  The Speaker should 
broker agreements, proponents argue, and ensure that 
compromises reflect relative party power.  Minbon 21 
suggested extending the Speaker's term to four years from the 
current two years and making it customary for the speaker not 
to run in the following parliamentary elections to reinforce 
his/her political neutrality.  Such a system, however, 
depends on a great deal of confidence in the trustworthiness 
of a single individual. 
 
¶12.  (C) Democratization of parties.  The GNP lawmakers 
proposed instituting a democratic electoral candidate 
nomination process within the political parties.  As it 
stands, the party leadership decides through an opaque 
process which candidates can run in which districts.  The 
April 2008 nomination process made clear that personal 
connections to the party bosses were paramount in getting the 
parties' blessing.  Additionally, politicians have to vote 
along party lines if they want to stay in the leadership's 
good graces.  Getting rid of "boss politics" would enable 
candidates to develop loyalty to their constituents rather 
than to their party leadership and thus give citizens more 
say in how their representative votes.  The most powerful 
figures within the party, however, are unlikely to willingly 
relinquish that power, making this reform difficult. 
 
----------------------------- 
Additional Possible Solutions 
----------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (C) A few observers have offered up ideas intended to 
address other problems with Korean democracy that could 
incorporate minority opinions or at least strengthen the 
voice of the citizenry in its country's democratic process. 
 
¶14.  (C) Reforming term limits.  This effort is usually 
presented in the context of revising the constitution to 
allow the president to serve two, four-year terms. 
Instituting such a system and holding the presidential 
election in the middle of the National Assembly's term would 
give voters the opportunity to hold a de-facto referendum on 
the government's performance on a more regularized basis. 
 
¶15.  (C) Proportional system.  Korea already has a mix of 
direct and proportional representatives, a mechanism that has 
been very effective in including more women in the National 
Assembly.  Some advocate instituting larger, multi-member, 
proportional electoral districts as a means to overcome 
regionalism.  For example, even though the majority in 
GNP-controlled Youngnam would vote for the GNP, the 
allocation of seats based on percentage of the vote for each 
party would create the possibility that a DP candidate could 
get elected.  Proportional systems have been proven to be a 
highly-effective means of including more diversity in the 
assembly.  Single party governments are far less likely to 
form under proportional electoral systems, alleviating 
concerns about majoritarianism by incorporating more minority 
voices into the decision-making process.  There are 
downsides, however.  Such a system adds inefficiency to the 
governing process, encourages more minor parties to form and 
gives them more power, introducin 
g instability into the system. 
 
¶16.  (C) Other common approaches to obviating the perils of a 
purely majoritarian system are infrequently discussed in 
 
Korea.  Strengthening the rule of law over time would help 
reassure people that the law is being applied equally and 
fairly, thus increasing trust in the government. 
Decentralizing authority -- an option that is occasionally, 
but not seriously, discussed -- would devolve some of the 
central government's power down to the local level, giving 
people more of a voice in their own affairs.  The use of 
referendums and opposition party veto are two more mechanisms 
some democracies use to balance the majority opinion, but 
neither is likely to be embraced in the foreseeable future. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶17.  (C) Koreans admit to being deeply embarrassed by the 
worldwide coverage of the fisticuffs and other violent 
happenings in the National Assembly over the past winter. 
There is clearly public support for changes in legislative 
and electoral rules toward politics of greater consensus, 
especially in better defining the role of the opposition. 
However, as always, the biggest problem is the politicians -- 
they are unlikely to enact sweeping reform that might 
undermine the parties' respective political power.  Instead, 
party leaders will likely opt for ad-hoc agreements that 
enable (slow) progress on key legislation instead of spending 
political capital on difficult systemic reforms.  This will 
mean fits-and-starts on legislation in the National Assembly, 
with little likelihood of long-term fixes. 
STEPHENS
</file>