^  문서참조번호  ^  생성일  ^  비밀등급  ^  출처  ^  태그  ^
|  10SEOUL80  |  2010-01-20 09:00  |  미분류  |  주한 미국 대사관  |  {{tag>PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US }}  |
====== 제 목: 서울, 언론 보도 2010년 1월 20일 ======

미 분 류 SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 000080

국방부망 배포

행정명령 12958: 해당없음
태그: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
제 목: 서울, 언론 보도 2010년 1월 20일

===== 주요 뉴스 =====

조선일보.
전체 텔레비전, 전교조 시국선언 1심 무죄

중앙일보
초중고 시험 단답형→논술형 바뀐다

동아일보, 한국일보, 서울신문
법-검 '강기갑 갈등' 속 법조 수장 비공개 회동

한겨레 신문
한나라당, 법원에 무차별 색깔공세

세계일보
정부, 아이티에 PKO 파병 검토/2차 긴급의료진 파견키로
===== 국내 동향 =====

한국 통일연구원은 북한 지도자 김정일이 2012년 이후 생존 못할 가능성이 높다고 최근 발간된 보고서에서 밝혔다. 동 보고서는 또 미국 정부가 북한 정권 교체를 모색할 가능성도 제기하였다. (조선, 동아, 한국, 한겨레, 세계)
===== 사설 =====

[[http://bemil.chosun.com/nbrd/bbs/view.html?b_bbs_id=10038&num=64121|'미국 없는 아시아', '아시아 없는 미국' (조선일보, 2010년 1월 20일, 34페이지)]]
박두식 논설위원

<wrap hi>**과거 역사를 보면 東아시아 외교·안보 틀이 흔들릴 때마다 한반도가 화(禍)를 입었다**

최근 미·일·중 힘의 균형에 심상치 않은 변화 시작됐다.</wrap>

힐러리 클린턴 국무장관은 올해도 여행 스케줄의 맨 앞에 아시아·태평양 지역을 올려놓았었다. 작년 2월 취임 후 첫 방문국으로 한국·일본·중국을 찾은 데 이어 2년 연속 아태 순방을 계획했던 것이다. 유럽부터 찾아가던 역대 국무장관들과 달리 아시아를 방문하는 것에 대해 클린턴은 "외교의 절반은 존재를 드러내는 데 있다"고 했다.

그러나 클린턴은 중간 기착지인 하와이 도착 직후 터진 아이티 대지진 때문에 호주·뉴질랜드 등 아태 순방 계획을 취소했다. 대신 그는 하와이 이스트웨스트(East-West) 센터 연설에서 아시아에 대한 애정을 한껏 드러냈다. 그는 "미국이 아시아로 돌아왔다는 사실에 의심의 여지가 없으며 앞으로 계속 머물기 위해 돌아왔다"고 했다. 로버트 게이츠 국방장관도 최근 "미국은 아시아에 잠시 머무는 게 아니라 상존할 것"이라고 말했다.

미국은 19세기 후반 이후 아시아를 떠난 적이 없다. 그런데 왜 미국 외교·국방장관이 새삼스럽게 이 이야기를 꺼내는 걸까. 그 답을 찾으려면 일본 열도 남단에 위치한 오키나와 섬으로 눈길을 돌려야 한다. 65년 전 오키나와는 비극의 땅이었다. 1945년 4월 1일부터 시작된 83일간의 오키나와 전투에서 미군 1만2000여명, 일본군 11만여명이 전사했고, 15만명가량의 오키나와 주민이 목숨을 잃었다. 비극의 섬 오키나와는 그 후 55년간 미·일 동맹의 상징으로 자리잡았다. 미군은 1972년 오키나와를 일본에 돌려줄 때까지 직접 관할했고, 지금도 주일미군 기지의 74%가량이 이 섬에 있다. 최근 미국과 일본이 이전 문제를 놓고 충돌하고 있는 미 해병대 비행장이 위치한 후텐마 기지도 그중 하나다. 오키나와 주둔 미군은 한반도 유사시 가장 먼저 투입되는 신속기동군 역할도 맡고 있어 한반도 안보와도 직결돼 있다.

미군 기지가 있는 곳에선 현지 주민들과의 마찰이 벌어지기 마련이다. 미군 비행과 안전사고도 끊이지 않는다. 미국과 일본은 10년에 걸친 협상 끝에 2006년 후텐마 기지를 같은 오키나와의 슈워브 기지 부근으로 옮기는 데 합의했다. 그러나 지난해 9월 집권한 하토야마 민주당 정권은 이 합의의 전면 재검토를 내걸었고 미군 기지들을 오키나와 밖으로 이전하는 방안까지 들고 나왔다.

'설마'했던 워싱턴은 격분했다. 작년 말 워싱턴에선 미·일 동맹의 먼 앞날을 위해서라도 이번 기회에 일본의 버릇을 고쳐 놓아야 한다는 강경론이 힘을 얻었다. 백악관 아주국장을 지낸 빅터 차 조지타운대 교수는 하토야마 내각을 한국의 노무현 정권에 비유하면서 "뚜렷한 전략과 대안도 없이 미·일 동맹을 흔드는 것은 일본 안보는 물론 경제에까지 불행한 결과를 초래할 것"이라고 경고했다그러자 지일파들이 "기지 이전 문제 하나 때문에 미·일 동맹을 잃을 순 없다"고 맞섰다. 오바마 대통령이 주창한 '소프트파워'의 이론적 근거를 제공한 조지프 나이 하버드대 교수 등이 대표적 인물이다.

**후텐마보다 미국을 더 자극한 게 하토야마가 제안한 '동아시아 공동체'와 '동아시아 정상회의' 구상이다.** 

미국을 이런 모임에서 아예 빼 버리는 데 일본이 앞장섰기 때문이다. 클린턴과 게이츠가 "미국은 아시아로 돌아왔고, 앞으로도 계속 있을 것"이라고 강조하기 시작한 것은 '미국 없는 아시아, 아시아 없는 미국'은 꿈도 꾸지 말라는 경고이기도 하다.

후텐마에서 터져나온 미·일 동맹의 파열음이 한순간 스쳐가는 바람으로 끝날지, 아니면 55년간 유지돼온 동아시아 외교·안보의 틀 전체를 흔드는 태풍으로 변할지는 아직 예측하기 어렵다. 그러나 최근 동아시아에서 과거엔 상상할 수 없었던 일들이 벌어지고 있는 것은 분명하다. 영원할 것처럼 보였던 미·일 동맹이 흔들리는가 하면, 20세기 전반기 내내 전쟁을 치렀던 중국과 일본이 합동 군사 훈련에 합의했다. 동아시아에서 이는 모든 변화의 진앙을 찾아가면 세계 패권까지 넘볼 만큼 성장한 중국이란 존재와 맞닥뜨리게 된다.

<wrap hi>**과거 한반도는 동아시아의 틀이 흔들릴 때마다 크고 작은 변란을 겪었다.**

중국 왕조가 바뀌거나, 일본이 새 질서를 찾겠다고 나서면 한반도가 제일 앞줄에서 그 격랑에 부딪혀야 했던 것이다. 격변의 시기마다 이 땅의 위정자들은 국제 정세에 눈과 귀를 닫은 채 '우물 안 정치'로 허송하면서 화(禍)를 키웠다. 세종시 논란 등에서 드러난 우리 정치의 수준을 보면 그런 과거의 악몽이 되풀이되지 않는다고 장담하기도 어려울 것 같다.</wrap> <WRAP center round info 90%>//**하이라이트 부분은 美대사관이 번역에서 거두절미한 내용 황당 그 자체**//
삭제/누락한 부분을(하이라이트 부분) 읽어보면 알겠지만, 역내 정치가 요동치는데 세종시 논란으로 '우물 안 정치'하는 한국의 국내 정치 현실을 비판하는 내용으로 필자가 주장하는 핵심 내용이다. 아마도 美대사가 국무부 엘리트가 보면 눈살을 찌푸릴 거라고 판단해 누락했지 싶다. 물론 다른 이유가 있을 수도 있지만, 뉴스 내용을 번역해 상부에 보고하는 내용을 누락하는 짓은 미국이 과연 '대국'인가?하는 생각이 절로 난다. 이런 일탈? 행위는 주로 '박근혜 정권의 짓?' 혹은 '뉴스퀵'이란 언론사의 '기사 삭제 놀이'에서나 나올 법한 웃지 못한 헤프닝?이다. 자 두 삭제된 두 기사를 비교해 보자! [[https://diigo.com/07efdz|문재인 지지율 원동력 '진실/온화함' 이미지]]란 제하의 //뉴스퀵// 기사를 삭제하고 다시 쓴[[https://diigo.com/07ejxw|문재인 지지율 '진실/온화함', 김무성 '남자다움/듬직함']]란 제하의 //뉴스퀵// 기사를 보면 제목에 뜬금없이 김무성 관장하는 내용이 추가되었을 뿐만 아니라 애초의 기사 시작 부분에 포함된 박근혜 관련 여론 동향 부분이 완전히 삭제되었다. 더 웃긴 건 내가 트윗으로 이 내용을 날리자 삭제하고 다시 쓴 기사마저 삭제되었다.ㅋㅋㅋ 대충 삭제한 사람의 마음이야 이해해줄 수도 있지만, 안타깝게도 디지털 세계에서 삭제란 존재하지 않는다. 상술한 링크는 전부 삭제된 기사를 살려 놓았지 않는가? [[http://www.wikileaks-kr.org/dokuwiki/newsquick?rev=1425851623&do=diff| 두 기사가 어떻게 다른지 한 눈에 비교하기]] 8-)
</WRAP>

[[http://www.mediagaon.or.kr/jsp/sch/common/popup/newsviewpopup.jsp?newsId=01101101.20100119100002306|[사설] 아이티 구호는 '큰 나라' 한국의 도리 (한국일보 1월 20일, 39면)]]

아이티의 대지진 재앙과 국제사회의 구호 노력이 세계 언론의 톱뉴스 자리를 지키고 있다. 세종시 논란 등 집안 일에 파묻힌 우리와 다른 모습이다. 국제사회가 카리브 해의 작은 섬나라, 보잘것없는 변방국가의 재난에 동정을 쏟는 바탕은 인류 공통의 연민과 우애일 것이다. 그러나 약한 나라의 불행일수록 너그러운 인도적 지원을 베푸는 것은 진정한 나라의 크기와 아량을 가늠하는 척도이다. 우리 정부와 민간이 전에 없이 적극적으로 구호와 지원에 나선 것은 반갑다.

아이티의 참상은 사망 20만 명에 이재민 300만 명, 식량구호 대상 200만 명 등의 수치가 대변한다. 반기문 유엔 사무총장은"유엔이 수십 년 만에 직면한 최악의 인도주의적 위기"라고 말했다. 2004년 동남아 지진해일, 쓰나미보다 참혹한 재앙이다. 유엔 평화유지군이 장기 주둔할 정도로 국가 기능이 허약한 것이 최악의 위기를 불렀다. 

국제사회의 적극적 지원은 참상을 차마 지켜볼 수 없기 때문이다. 그러나 미국 프랑스 등 옛 제국주의 종주국들은 중남미의 독립혁명을 선도한 아이티의 행로에 이해관계가 깊다. 미국이 항공모함과 병력 1만 명을 급파해 구호와 치안 확보에 나선 것은 상징적이다. 이에 맞서 함정과 병원선을 보낸 프랑스는 구호물자 수송기의 착륙을 막은 미군의'점령'의도를 비난해 논란을 벌였다.

이런 다툼보다 주목할 것은 유럽연합(EU)과 중국 등의 움직임이다. EU는 1억4,000만 유로를 긴급 지원한다. 영국은 2,000만 유로 지원에 민간이 2억3,000만 유로를 보태기로 했다. 역사적으로나 정치경제적으로 뚜렷한 연고와 이해가 없는 나라들의 손 큰 지원은 그저 인도적 차원이 아니다. 국가 이미지와 품격을 높이고 정치경제적 위상과 영향력을 다지는 지혜를 일찍이 터득한 때문이다.

대외 지원에 인색함을 늘 자책한 우리가 평화유지군 참여를 비롯해 역량에 걸맞은 지원에 나선 것은 진실로 큰 나라, 중심국가로 가는 길이다. 정부와 민간의 결단을 거듭 치하하며 의미 깊은 활동을 기대한다.
===== 특집 =====

[[http://article.joins.com/news/article/article.asp?total_id=3974063|중국 “100만 달러 내겠다”에 대만 “그럼 우린 500만 달러” (중앙일보, 1월 19일, 14면) ]]

정현목 기자

재난의 땅 아이티가 ‘구호 외교’의 각축장이 되고 있다.

국제사회의 도움으로 새로 태어날 아이티에서의 영향력 확보를 위해 각국이 경쟁적으로 구호에 뛰어들고 있는 것이다. 가장 적극적인 나라는 미국이다. 미국은 지진 발생 직후 대규모 군병력과 함께 항공모함을 파견했다. 구호지원금으로 1억 달러(약 1100억원)를 내놓았다.

미국의 노림수는 카리브해에서의 영향력 확대다. 쿠바를 견제하기 위해 바로 옆에 위치한 아이티를 우군화할 필요가 있는 것이다. 부시 행정부가 2004년 동남아 지진해일 때 소극적으로 대처해 실추된 대외 이미지를 개선하려 한다는 분석도 있다.
중남미 좌파 국가들은 이를 곱게 받아들이지 않고 있다. 베네수엘라의 차베스 대통령은 “전쟁 상황도 아닌데 미국이 무장병력을 대규모로 파견하는 것은 대지진을 이용해 아이티를 점령하려는 처사”라고 비난했다. 니카라과의 다니엘 오르테가 대통령도 아이티에서의 미군 철수를 촉구했다.

중국과 대만도 힘겨루기를 하고 있다. 아이티는 대만과 외교 관계를 맺고 있는 23개국 중 하나다. 반면 중국은 아이티와 외교 관계가 없다. 중국은 대만을 의식해 아이티 구호에 발벗고 나섰다. 먼저 100만 달러(약 11억원)의 구호 지원금을 내놓겠다고 약속했다. 50여 명의 구조대와 함께 20t의 구호물자도 제공했다. 중국은 아이티의 유엔 평화유지 활동(PKO)에 참여 중인 중국인 구조를 명분으로 내세웠지만, 속내는 미국의 뒷마당인 카리브해에서 영향력을 확대하겠다는 것으로 분석된다. 대만은 이에 질세라 중국 지원액의 다섯 배인 500만 달러(약 55억원)를 지원한다고 밝혔다. 수교국 아이티에서 중국의 영향력 확대를 좌시할 수 없다는 것이다. 마잉주(馬英九) 대만 총통은 이달 말 중남미 방문 때 아이티 방문을 적극 검토하고 있다. 대만은 ‘아이티 지진 공동구조대를 구성하자’는 중국의 제안도 거부했다.

[[http://news.donga.com/3/all/20100120/25521803/1|“美, 北 지배엘리트 교체전략 염두” (동아일보 2010년 1월 20일 2면)]]

신석호 기자

**통일硏 보고서 “2012년 이후 김정일 존재 안할 가능성 커”**

국책연구기관인 통일연구원이 19일 김정일 국방위원장 사망 후 북한 급변 사태와 미국의 북한 체제전환 시도 가능성 등에 관한 보고서를 잇달아 내놨다. 이런 주제는 김대중 노무현 정부 시절에는 공개적으로 다루지 못했던 내용이다.

통일연구원은 이날 발간한 연구총서 ‘북한체제 전환을 위한 전략적 과제와 한국의 동북아 4국 협력전략’을 통해 “미국은 북한 지배엘리트를 교체하는 것을 비록 공개적으로 말하지 않고 있지만 암묵적인 대안으로 삼고 있을 것”이라고 분석했다. 이어 “미국이 북한 지배엘리트를 교체하거나 그들의 정책변화를 유도하기 위해 취할 수 있는 전략은 크게 세 가지로 요약될 수 있다”며 △북한을 지속적으로 압박해 김정일 정권이 궁정 쿠데타를 통해 권좌에서 밀려나게 하는 방안 △김 위원장을 제거하기 위한 군사적 조치를 취하는 방안 △김 위원장이 노쇠했고 병에 걸린 사실을 감안해 자연사할 때까지 기다리는 대안 등을 적시했다.

통일연구원은 또 다른 연구총서 ‘통일대계 탐색연구’에서 북한 급변사태 가능성에 대한 기존의 논의를 종합하면서 “2012년 이후 북한에서는 김 위원장이 존재하지 않을 가능성이 많다”고 전망했다. 이어 “김 위원장 이후 군부 쿠데타와 같은 권력지도부의 변동, 주민 소요와 폭동, 대량 학살, 대량 난민 발생과 같은 급변사태가 발생할 개연성이 있다”고 전망했다.
스티븐스
포와로 탐정의 번역 (c) 무단복제나 전재를 금지합니다((기사는 당연히 제외, 내가 쓰거나 번역한 부분만 해당))
===== 원본(기실 번역본) 내려받기 =====
<file rtf 10SEOUL80.rtf>
UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SEOUL 000080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR ECON KPAO KS US
SUBJECT: SEOUL - PRESS BULLETIN; JANUARY 20, 2010 
 
TOP HEADLINES 
------------- 
 
Chosun Ilbo, All TVs 
Progressive Teachers Union Members Found 
Not Guilty of Violating Law Banning Teachers 
from Collective Political Activities 
 
JoongAng Ilbo 
Essay Questions on the Rise in Schools in Seoul 
 
Dong-a Ilbo, Hankook Ilbo, Seoul Shinmun 
Chief Justice and Other Senior Judges Hold Closed-Door Meeting amid 
Conflict between Court and Prosecution over Lawmaker Kang's 
Not-Guilty Verdict for Violence 
at National Assembly 
 
Hankyoreh Shinmun 
Ruling GNP Launches Indiscriminate, Ideological Attack 
on Court for Controversial Ruling 
 
Segye Ilbo 
Seoul Considers Sending Peacekeeping Troops to Haiti 
 
 
DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------- 
 
The Korea Institute for National Unification said in a recent 
publication that there is a high possibility that North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il may not survive after 2012. The report also 
raised the possibility that Washington may seek a regime change in 
North Korea. (Chosun, Dong-a, Hankook, Hankyoreh, Segye) 
 
 
OPINIONS/EDITORIALS 
------------------- 
 
"ASIA WITHOUT AMERICA," "AMERICA WITHOUT ASIA" 
(Chosun Ilbo, January 20, 2010, Page 34) 
 
By Editorial Writer Park Doo-sik 
 
The Asia-Pacific region had initially been the highest priority on 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's travel schedule for this 
year.  After assuming the post last February, she traveled to the 
ROK, Japan, and China for her first official trip, and this year, 
she also planned to visit the Asia-Pacific region.  Regarding the 
fact that,unlike her predecessors, she chose Asia, rather than 
Europe, as the destination for her first overseas trip, Secretary 
Clinton said, "Half of diplomacy is showing up." 
 
However, right after arriving in Hawaii, she canceled her trips to 
Asia-Pacific nations, such as Australia and New Zealand, due to the 
devastating earthquake in Haiti.  Instead, she fully displayed her 
affection for Asia during her speech at the East-West Center in 
Honolulu.  She stated, "The United States is back in Asia, but I 
want to underscore we are back to stay."  Secretary of Defense 
Robert Gates also recently said, "The United States is not a 
visiting power in Asia, but a resident power." 
 
Since the latter half of the 19th century, the U.S. has not left 
Asia.  But why did the U.S. Secretaries of State and Defense 
suddenly make such statements?  The answer can be found at Okinawa 
south of the main islands of Japan.  About 55 years ago, the island 
was a tragic land.  During the 83-day-long battle at Okinawa, which 
started on April 1, 1945, about 12,000 U.S. soldiers and 110,000 
Japanese troops lost their lives, and 150,000 residents of the 
island were killed.  Since then, the tragic island became a symbol 
of the U.S.-Japan alliance for 55 years.  The U.S. had control of 
Okinawa until it returned the island to Japanese control in 1972, 
and about 74 percent of the U.S. bases in Japan are still located on 
this island.  The Futenma Air Base is one of them.  As U.S. troops 
 
SEOUL 00000080  002 OF 004 
 
 
stationed at Okinawa play the role of a rapid reaction force in the 
event of an emergency on the Korean Peninsula, they are directly 
related to security on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
In places with the presence of U.S. bases, there are always 
conflicts with local residents.  U.S. forces carry out flight 
exercises and incidents erupt continuously.  After a decade of 
negotiations, the U.S. and Japan agreed to relocate the Futenma base 
to Camp Schwab in Okinawa in 2006.  However, in September last year, 
the Hatoyama Government announced it will comprehensively review the 
agreement and even stated its preference to move the Futenma base 
off Okinawa. 
 
This angered the USG.  At the end of last year, a growing number of 
hard-liners said that for the future of the U.S.-Japan alliance, the 
U.S. should not tolerate the Japanese position.  Victor Cha, a 
professor at Georgetown University and former Director for Asian 
Affairs at the National Security Council, likened the Hatoyama 
Government to the Roh Moo-hyun Administration.  Cha warned that if 
Japan tries to jeopardize the U.S.-Japan alliance without a clear 
strategy and alternatives, its security and economy may face 
consequences.  Others said that the U.S. should not ruin the 
U.S.-Japan alliance just because of the Futenma issue.  Among them 
is Joseph Nye, a professor at Harvard University, who provided a 
theoretical rationale for President Obama's "soft power." 
 
Prime Minister Hatoyama's "East Asia ommunity" and "East Asia 
Summit" initiatives piqued the U.S. more than the Futenma relocation 
issue, because the initiatives exclude the U.S.  The (strong 
statements) by Secretaries Clinton and Gates that "the U.S. is back 
in Asia and is back to stay" constitute a warning against ever 
dreaming of an "Asia without America and an America without Asia." 
 
It is still too early to predict whether the cracks in the 
U.S.-Japan alliance caused by the Futenma issue will end up as just 
a passing wind or will turn into a typhoon that could shake the 
foundations of the 55-year-long diplomatic and security framework in 
East Asia.  It is crystal clear, however, that things that were 
unimaginable in the past are happening in East Asia.  The U.S.-Japan 
alliance that seemed permanent is being shaken, and China and Japan, 
which fought against each other throughout the first half of the 
20th century, have agreed on joint military drills.  At the 
epicenter of all these changes in East Asia is China which has grown 
(strong) enough to aim for world supremacy. 
 
 
ROK SHOULD PROVIDE RELIEF AID TO HAITI TO BECOME "GREAT COUNTRY" 
(Hankook Ilbo, January 20, Page 39) 
 
Haiti's catastrophic earthquake and global relief efforts are 
grabbing international headlines.  While the international community 
was stepping up relief efforts, the ROKG was only preoccupied with 
its internal affairs such as the controversial Sejong City project. 
There has been an international outpouring of sympathy toward a 
small island in the Caribbean Sea.  People in the world are showing 
compassion and friendship.  A country can be called a true "great 
country" when it can provide generous humanitarian aid to a 
devastated country regardless of its size.  It is a welcome sign 
that the ROKG and its civilian sector are making active moves to 
provide relief aid to Haiti. 
 
Haiti's terrible earthquake left 200,000 dead and 3 million 
homeless, and 2 million need food aid.  Ban Ki-moon, UN 
Secretary-General, described the situation in Haiti as "one of the 
worst humanitarian crises in decades."  This disaster is more 
horrible than the 2004 tsunami in Southeast Asia.  The Haiti crisis 
was (further) fueled by Haiti's fragile government system.  UN 
peacekeeping forces have been stationed in Haiti for a long time. 
 
The international community is intensifying aid efforts because the 
situation in Haiti is so serious.  Old imperialists such as the U.S. 
and France have a deep interest in the future of Haiti which led the 
independence movement in Latin America.  It is symbolic that the 
U.S. dispatched 10,000 forces and an aircraft carrier to assist 
 
SEOUL 00000080  003 OF 004 
 
 
relief efforts.  France, which sent navy ships and a hospital ship, 
criticized U.S. forces for blocking a French airplane carrying aid 
materials from landing, sparking controversy. 
 
What is more noteworthy than this (U.S.-France) squabble is the 
action of countries, like the EU and China.  The EU earmarked 140 
million euros in emergency aid for Haiti.  Britain offered 20 
million euros in aid and its civilian sector pledged 230 million 
euros.  This kind of huge aid from countries that have no clear 
historical and politico-economic ties and interests is not just 
humanitarian aid.  This is because they know how to increase their 
global image and dignity and to expand their politico-economic 
status and influence. 
 
In order to become a truly great country, the ROK, which has 
considered itself stingy in providing aid, should make contributions 
in line with its international status, including participation in 
peace-keeping forces.  We (Hankook Ilbo) praise the ROK and its 
civilian sector for taking affirmative action and also urge them to 
engage in aid efforts in a meaningful way. 
 
 
 
FEATURES 
-------- 
 
CHINA SAYS "WE WILL GIVE ONE MILLION DOLLARS IN AID," TO WHICH 
TAIWAN REPLIES "WE WILL GIVE FIVE" 
(JoongAng Ilbo, January 19, Page 14) 
 
By Reporter Jeong Hyun-mok 
 
Haiti Becomes Arena of Competition for Relief Diplomacy 
 
Disaster-stricken Haiti is turning into an arena of competition for 
"relief diplomacy."  Countries are vying to provide relief aid 
(apparently) in order to secure their influence in Haiti, which will 
be reborn due to international assistance.  The most proactive 
country is the U.S., which offered $100 million in assistance and 
sent a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, along with massive military 
forces, shortly after a powerful quake struck Haiti. 
 
The U.S's aim is to expand its influence in the Caribbean.  The U.S. 
needs to make Haiti, which neighbors Cuba, its ally in an effort to 
check Cuba.  Some observers say that the U.S. wants to restore its 
image which was tarnished in 2004 when the Bush Administration 
failed to take active action following the earthquake and tsunami in 
Southeast Asia. 
 
Left-wing Latin American countries are not showing a favorable 
response to the U.S. move.  Venezuelan President Chavez denounced 
the U.S's massive troop dispatch as an attempt to occupy Haiti by 
taking advantage of the country's earthquake.  Nicaraguan President 
Daniel Ortega also is calling for the withdrawal of U.S. troops from 
Haiti. 
 
China and Taiwan are also engaging in a tug of war.  Haiti is one of 
the 23 nations that have diplomatic ties with Taiwan, but Haiti does 
not have diplomatic relations with China.  Conscious of Taiwan, 
China rushed to aid the quake-hit nation.  It provided a 50 -member 
rescue team and 20 tons of equipment and humanitarian aid and 
pledged to offer 1 million dollars of earthquake aid.  Although 
China publicly says that the aid is aimed at rescuing Chinese 
servicemen serving the UN peacekeeping operations in Haiti, 
observers note that China's true intention is to expand its 
influence in the Caribbean, the U.S. backyard.  Taiwan also 
announced that it would provide 5 million dollars of aid to Haiti, 
five times as much as China's aid, suggesting that Taiwan will not 
sit back and watch China expand its clout in Haiti.  Taiwanese 
President Ma Ying-jeou is actively considering a visit to Haiti 
during his trip to Central and South America at the end of this 
month.  Taiwan also rejected China's proposal for the establishment 
of a joint rescue and search team in Haiti. 
 
 
SEOUL 00000080  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
REPORT SAYS U.S. CONSIDERS STRATEGIES TO INDUCE CHANGE OF THE 
NORTH'S RULING ELITE 
(Dong-a Ilbo, January 20, 2010, Page 2) 
 
By Reporter Shin Suk-ho 
 
KINU report says, "There is a high possibility that North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-il may not survive after 2012." 
 
The state-run Korea Institute for National Unification (KINU), on 
January 19, released a series of reports on a North Korean 
contingency and the possibility of the U.S. seeking a North Korean 
regime change after the death of North Korean leader Kim Jong-il. 
These are the subjects that could not be publicly dealt with under 
the Kim Dae-jung and Roh Moo-hyun Administrations. 
 
In its publication titled "Strategic Tasks for a Regime Change in 
North Korea and the ROK's Strategies for Cooperation with its four 
Northeast Asian countries," the KINU noted, "Although the U.S. is 
not publicly mentioning a change of North Korea's ruling elite, it 
probably considers it an implicit alternative."  It went on to say, 
"In order to seek a change of the North's ruling elite or induce the 
North's policy change, the U.S. may choose one of the three 
strategies: first, putting continued pressure on the North and 
getting him out of power through a royal coup d'tat; second, taking 
military steps to remove North Korean leader Kim; and third, waiting 
until Kim, who is aged and is suffering from disease, dies a natural 
death. 
 
The KINU, in another publication titled "Study of Long-range Policy 
for Unification," predicted, "There is a high possibility that North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-il may not survive after 2012," adding, 
"After Kim, emergencies, such as a change of the leadership in power 
like a military coup d'tat, civil unrest or riot, a large-scale 
massacre, and the occurrence of massive refugees, may likely happen 
in North Korea." 
 
 
STEPHENS
</file>