^ 문서번호 ^ 생성일 ^ 배포일 ^ 분 류 ^ 출 처 ^
|10SEOUL311| 2010-02-24 08:02| 2011-08-30 01:44|	일 반    |서울 대사관|

====== 제 목: 언론 브리핑 -2010년 2월 25일 ======

  *UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 SEOUL 000311 
 
  *SIPDIS 
 
  *E.O. 12958: N/A 

  *태 그:PREL __**(([External Political Relations]))**__, PGOV, MARR __**(([Military and Defense Arrangements]))**__, ECON, KPAO, KS __**(([Korea (South)]))**__, US ->고치기
  *SUBJECT: SEOUL - 보도 속보; 2010년 2월 25일

  *번역자 : alex (번역 주: 위키리크스한국 사용자 이름) --- //[[|Alex]] 2011/10/18 21:01//


===== 탑 헤드라인 =====

[[http://wikileaks.org/cable/2010/02/10SEOUL311.html]].
조선일보
이승훈이 남자 10000미터 스피드 스케이팅에서 놀라운 금메달을 땄다. 아시아에서 최초로 딴 금메달이다.
장거리 올림픽 경기

중앙일보
“완벽한” 김연아가 먼저 Figure 쇼트 프로그램을 세계 신기록을 세우며 끝내다.
 
동아일보, 세계일보, 서울신문, 모든 TV
대한민국을 위한 또 다른 금메달 Day
이승훈의 기적같은 금메달이 세계를 놀라게 하다; 김연아가 쇼트 프로그램에서 세계 신기록을 세우다. 금메달을 향하면서,

한국일보
벤쿠버의 드라마! 한국이 미소짓다.
 
한겨레 신문
“벽”이 깨지다.
이승훈이 스케이팅에서 올림픽 신기록으로 금메달을 따다.


===== DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS =====

Assistant USTR Jim Sanford에 따르면, 버락 오바마 대통령이 KORUS FTA와 관련된 당면 문제들을 해결하기 위해 명령했다고 한다.

이 주목할 사항(remark)은 쌍방 무역 협정에 대한 국회 승인을 적극적으로 속행(actively pursue)하려는 오바마 행정부의 의지(willingness)를 나타내는 것일지도 모른다. (중앙, 동아, 서울, KBS, MBC) 

2월 24일 연설에서 국방부 장관 김태영은 남한과 미국은 계획된 전시작전통제권 환수(미국으로부터 남한에게)에 따른 가능한 안보공백상태를 막기 위해 협력해야 한다고 말했다. (동아)


===== 국제뉴스 =====

어제 베이징에서 북한 정책 특별대표인 Stephen Bosworth이  
중국 핵 외교 장관 우다웨이와의 만남 후에 기자들에게 말했다:
“우리는 막 매우 유용한 관점을 교환했다. ... 6자 회담의 재개를 위한 노력의 상태에서”(한국, 세계, KBS, MBC) 
 
베이징과 서울에 있는 외교 통신통들에 의하면, 그가 2월 9-13일에 베이징을 방문하는 동안, 북한의 핵 외교장관인 김계관이 중국에게 미국이 북한의 체면을 세워주는 조치를 취하도록 몰아대라고(urge) 요청했다고 한다. 그리고 중국은, 북한이 6자 회담 재개의 전제조건으로 제재 해제를 요구하는 것을 멈추라고 강하게 몰아댔다. (중앙)

남한의 핵 외교장관인 유명환은 2월 24일 남한 특파원들과 함께한 베이징 회의에서 6자 회담은 아마 올해 상반기에 재개될 것이라고 말했다. (조선, KBS, 민중의 소리) 


===== 매체 분석 =====

===== -북한 =====

대부분의 남한 매체는 북한 정책 대표 Stephen Bosworth가 어제 베이징에서 핵 외교장관인 우다웨이와의 회의 후에 기자들에게 “우리는 “우리는 막 매우 유용한 관점을 교환했다. ... 6자 회담의 재개를 위한 노력의 상태에서”라고 말한 것을 인용하면서 보도했다.

이와 관련된 상황으로, 중도신문인 한국일보에서 이것을 인용하였다 

SEOUL 00000311  002 OF 006 
 
Beijing as saying: “중국은 반드시 분명하게 Bosworth 대사에게 북한이 미래에 취할 수 있는 선택을 전달할 것이다

한편, 보수 신문인 조선일보, 국영 KBS, 민중의 소리(인터넷 뉴스 사이트)는 2월 24일 베이징에서 남한의 주요 핵 협상자인 위성락에 의한 신문 발표를 보도했다. 여기서 그는 아마 6자회담은 올 상반기에 재개될 것이라고 말했다. 남한의 주요 핵 협상자가, 북한의 주요 핵 협상자인 김계관이 최근 베이징 방문 동안 중국 당국자들에게 새롭게 말한 것은 없었다고 진술했음에도 불구하고, 6자회담에 대해 김계관이 긍정적인 것으로 보인다고 보수신문인 조선일보는 특히 진술했다. 
Meanwhile, conservative Chosun Ilbo, state-run KBS and 
VoiceofPeople, an Internet news site, covered Feb. 24 press remarks 
in Beijing by Chief ROK nuclear negotiator, Wi Sung-lac, in which he 
said that the Six-Party Talks may resume in the first half of this 
year.  Conservative Chosun, in particular, observed that even though 
the chief ROK negotiator stated that there was nothing new about 
what North Korea's chief nuclear negotiator, Kim Kye-gwan, told 
Chinese officials during his recent visit to Beijing, he looked 
optimistic (about resuming the Six-Party Talks.) 
- 도움 요청: he looked optimistic에서 he가 김계관이 맞습니까?


베이징과 서울의 외교 소식통들을 인용하면, 북한의 주요 핵 협상자인 김계관이 2월 9-13일 베이징 방문 동안, 미국이 북한의 체면을 세워주는 조치를 취하도록 압박해달라고 요청했고, 반면 중국은 북한에게 북한이 6자 회담 재개의 전제조건으로 제재 해제를 요구하는 것을 멈추라고 강하게 몰아댔다는 것을 중도 우파인 중앙일보가 보도했다고 한다.
중앙일보는 소식통을 다음과 같이 인용했다: “김에게서 언급된 체면을 세워주는 조치는 
제재의 해제와 미국의 평화 조약을 논의하겠다는 공약(북한이 6자 회담복귀의 전제 조건을 요구했음)을 의미한다.

===== -U.S.-China Relations =====

조선일보는 전 외무부장관 윤영관이 쓴 논평을 전했다. 논평에서: “요즘, 미국과 중국은 대부분의 당면 문제에서 갈등하고 있다. (중략) 한반도에 부정적으로 영향을 미치는 문제들에 의한 미-중 마찰을 피하기 위해서, 우리는 미국과의 동맹 외에도 안보협력을 위한 체계를 만들어야 한다. 이것은 유럽의 유럽안보협력기구(OSCE)와 비슷하다. (중략) 북한 핵 문제 해결에 있어서 진전이 있건 없건, 우리는 북한과의 원활한 소통을 유지해야한다. (중략) 현재 행정부는 지난 2년간 북한에 대한 입장을 충분히 분명히 해왔다 그리고.. 북한의 태도에서 적어도 단기적 관점에서 변화의 신호가 있다. 한국정부가 남북정상회담을 주최함으로써 북한 정책을 업그레이드하기 위해 북한의 이러한 태도 변화를 이용할 때이다.  
 
===== FEATURES =====

미 대통령 오바마 한미 FTA 비준
(연합뉴스, 2월 24일)

황두형 기자


수요일에 미 대통령 버락 오바마가 남한, 콜롬비아, 파나마와의 자유 무역 협정에 관한 미해결 현안을 풀기로 결정한다고 말했다. 세 나라의 비준을 위해서다.
 
“이것이 바로 우리가 미해결 현안을 풀기위해 노력하는 이유다. 남한, 파나마, 콜롬비아와 같은 핵심 파트너들과의 무역 협정을 추진하기 위해서다.”
"우리는 반드시 같이 행동해야 한다. 그리고 나는 그렇게 되도록 하겠다."라고 오바마가 말했다. We must do the same, and I'm committed to making that happen," he said. (sic) -> sic?

남한을 상대로 한 자동차 무역에서의 불균형과 제한된 미국 쇠고기 수출은 2007년에 체결된 초기 한국 FTA 비준안의 가장 큰 장애물이다. 
 
지난주 오바마는 “올해 남한, 파나마, 콜롬비아와의 자유 무역 협정을 통화시키기 위해 압박할 것이다.”라고 말했다. 수출 증대를 통한 일자리 창출을 위해서다. although he cautioned that 


SEOUL 00000311  003 OF 006 
 
 
반드시 각 나라들과 “다른 결함들__**((번역 주: "different glitches"))**__”을 먼저 해결해야 한다.
 
미국은 부수적 합의에서 자동차와 쇠고기 문제를 거래 원문__**((번역 주: the text of the deal))**__의 수정 없이 다루길 원한다 
 
남한은 11월에 있을 중간 선거의 정치적 민감성 때문에, 더 이상의 비준 연기는 올해 비준 통과를 위태롭게 할 것이라 두려워하면서, 올 여름까지 한미 FTA(KORUS FTA)를 비준할 것을 요구하고 있다.__**((번역 주: South Korea is calling for the ratification of the Korea-US (KORUS) FTA by this summer, fearing that any further delay may jeopardize its passage this year due to the politically sensitive mid-term elections in November.))**__

한미 FTA는 건강보험, 재정 개혁, 그리고 다른 다급한 문제들 때문에 미뤄지고 있다__**((번역 주:has been sidelined))**__. 그리고 오바마는 적당한 “정치적 시기”를 찾을 것이라 말하고 있다.
The KORUS FTA has been sidelined by health care, financial reform 
and other more pressing issues, and Obama has said he will seek the 
right "political timing" for its submission amid protectionist 
sentiment in Congress in the worst recession in decades.  <- 번역 도움 요망
 
South Korea is calling for the ratification of the Korea-US (KORUS) 
FTA by this summer, fearing that any further delay may jeopardize 
its passage this year due to the politically sensitive mid-term 
elections in November. 
 
The KORUS FTA has been sidelined by health care, financial reform 
and other more pressing issues, and Obama has said he will seek the 
right "political timing" for its submission amid protectionist 
sentiment in Congress in the worst recession in decades. 
 
U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk echoed Obama's theme. 
 
"Right now, we are seeking to resolve outstanding issues on the 
Colombian, Korean, and Panamanian Free Trade Agreements in an effort 
to move those forward at the appropriate time," Kirk told the Retail 
Industry Leaders' Association Logistics Conference held here. 
 
The chief U.S. trade negotiator said those deals, once effectuated, 
will "tear down trade barriers and open up new markets for American 
businesses to grow and create jobs through trade," and "will create 
billions of dollars in new market access for American exporters." 
 
Kirk said last week that his office was trying to develop ideas to 
address its concerns over lopsided auto trade with South Korea so 
the free trade deal can clear Congress. 
 
"We need to address the concerns about fair trade in autos," he 
said. "We at USTR are hard at work to develop ideas for addressing 
these concerns, and we will be consulting closely with members of 
Congress and other American stakeholders as we move down this 
path." 
 
In his first State of the Union address last month, Obama pledged to 
enhance trade with South Korea, Colombia, and Panama to help fuel 
the fledgling economic recovery. 
 
"If America sits on the sidelines while other nations sign trade 
deals, we will lose the chance to create jobs on our shores," he 
said.  "That's why we will try to continue to shape a Doha trade 
agreement... that opens global markets, and why we will strengthen 
our trade relations in Asia and with key partners like South Korea, 
Panama, and Colombia." (sic) 
 
South Korea and India put a free trade deal into effect last month, 
and Seoul hopes to ratify another deal with the European Union, 
signed last year, that will take effect this summer. 
 
(Ed. Note:  This text was provided in English by Yonhap news 
service. The original quote  by President Obama is as follows: 
 
Now, I know that trade policy has been a longstanding divide between 
business and labor; Democrats and Republicans.  But to those who 
would reflexively support every trade deal, I would say that our 
competitors have to play fair and our agreements have to be 
enforced.  We simply cannot cede more jobs or markets to unfair 
trade practices.  And to those who would reflexively oppose every 
trade agreement, they need to know that if America sits on the 
sidelines while other nations sign trade deals, we will lose the 
chance to create jobs on our shores.  Other countries, whether China 
or Germany or Brazil, have been able to align the interests of 
workers, businesses, and government around trade agreements that 
open new markets and create new jobs.  We must do the same. 
 
That's why we launched the Trans Pacific Partnership to strengthen 
our trade relations with Asia, the fastest growing market in the 
world.  That's why we will work to resolve outstanding issues so 
that we can move forward on trade agreements with key partners like 
South Korea, Panama, and Colombia.  And that's why we will try to 
conclude a Doha trade agreement - not just any agreement, but one 
 
SEOUL 00000311  004 OF 006 
 
 
that creates real access to key global markets. ) 
 
 
THE MORE U.S., CHINA DRIFT APART, THE MORE WE SHOULD EMBRACE N. 
KOREA 
(Chosun Ilbo, February 25, Page 30; Excerpts) 
 
By Yoon Young-gwan, former Foreign Minister and professor at Seoul 
National University 
 
The U.S. and China are engaging in an intense power game.  These 
days, the U.S. and China are in conflict over most of the pending 
issues.  China may think that the U.S. is unlikely to recover its 
financial superpower status which it lost following the global 
economic crisis.  The U.S. faces the largest-ever budget deficit 
which observers believe will not be reversed within the next 10 
years.  Moreover, Japanese political kingpin Ichiro Ozawa visited 
China with a 600-member delegation while the country is at odds with 
the U.S.  (In this situation,) China may consider now to be the 
right time to change the rules of the game.  During a meeting in the 
U.S., a Chinese scholar allegedly said that the current China is not 
what it was, urging the U.S. to change its attitude toward China. 
 
However, the U.S., which is still a military superpower, has 
intervened in East Asia (affairs) since the early twentieth century 
and will not leave this area in the hands of China.  This may 
further intensify U.S.-China conflicts. 
 
When will an atmosphere of cooperation between the U.S. and China be 
created?  China will seek cooperation when it judges that its 
strained relations with the U.S. could deal a blow to its economy. 
Despite its outward confidence, China is vulnerable in many 
respects.  Hundreds of millions of people suffer from poverty. 
Without feeding them, the Communist government would not be able to 
win solid public support.  The issue of ethnic minorities could also 
be a destabilizing factor. 
 
The problem is that confrontation between the U.S. and China will 
put the ROK in a difficult position.  We are in a position where we 
inevitably need cooperation of both nations on the nuclear issue and 
North Korea's uncertain future.  However, if conflict between the 
U.S. and China deepens, and the suspicions between the two nations 
grow, they will hold each other in check and conflict with each 
other, rather than cooperating over the future of the Korean 
Peninsula.  The more distrustful the two nations are of each other, 
the more obsessed China will be with sustaining North Korea as a 
buffer zone against the influence of the ROK and the U.S. 
 
In order to prevent the U.S.-China conflict from (negatively) 
affecting issues on the Korean Peninsula, we need, in addition to 
the alliance with the U.S., to establish a mechanism for 
multilateral security cooperation, which is similar to the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). 
However, Northeast Asia does not have such a body yet.  This implies 
that Northeast Asia is a tough region where a power struggle is more 
intense than Europe. 
 
With the international political situation surrounding the Korean 
Peninsula getting rougher, a strong force bringing together the ROK 
and North Korea must be at work, and the ROK should lead the force, 
especially if the ROK has any willingness to determine the future of 
the Korean Peninsula on its own.  The situation in North Korea has 
become more urgent,and when compared with a car, has shifted from 
second to third gear.  Its economy has long been in tatters, and its 
currency reform has failed.  There is uncertainty about the regime's 
hereditary power succession, and residents distrust their 
government, which is not capable of feeding its people. 
 
Whether or not there is progress in resolving the North Korean 
nuclear issue, we should maintain channels for smooth communication 
with North Korea.  This is because those channels are the basis of 
the force in bringing the two Koreas together.  The current 
administration has sufficiently made its position clear to the North 
for the past two years, and we believe that the message has now 




====== 원 본 ======
=== *지구본모양의 링크를 클릭하세요 ===


