===== 제목 : 한국-일본 외무장관 회담 역사문제에 발목 잡혀 =====

  * 3급 비밀 SEOUL 000971
  * 국방부망 배포
  * 국방부망 배포
  * 행정명령 12958: 기밀해제: 04/03/2017
  * TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON KS JA
  * 제목: 한국-일본 외무장관 회담 역사문제에 발목 잡혀
  * 분류자: 정치참사 죠셉 윤  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 

----

  * 번역자: corey

 1. (3급) 요약: 4월 2일 외교통상부 아시아태평양국 동북아1과 이희섭과장은 3월 31일부터 4월 1일간 한국 외무장관 송민순과 방한한 일본 외무장관 아소 타로가 역사 문제들과(위안부, 교과서, 야스쿠니 신사) 양자간 문제(리앙쿠르 락스(*역자주 독도), EEZ, FTA, 그리고 문화교류) 뿐만 아니라 북한과 동북아시아에 초점을 모았다고 정치참사에게 말했다. 회담 분위기는 좋았던 반면에, 한국과 일본의 견해차가 너무 컸기에 대화를 진전시켜 나가기에는 너무 어려웠다: 양국은 2007년 노대통령의 일본 방문에 대해 검토하지도 않았다. 그러나 한국은 6월 3일 한국에서 한국-일본-중국 3국 외무장관 회담 제의에 대해 초기 긍정적인 반응을 얻었다고 이과장은 말했다.

 2. (3급) 4월 2일 외교통상부 아시아태평양국 동북아1과(일본) 이희섭과장은 한국의 제주도에서 3월 31일부터 4월 1일간 한국 외무장관 송민순과 방한한 일본 외무장관 아소 타로와의 외무장관 회담 정보를 정치참사에게 제공했다. 이과장은 3월 31일 토요일에 두 시간간 회담을 가졌으며, 이어서 두시간 동안 저녁을 함께했다고 말했다. 일요일인 4월 1일에는 두 장관이 약 10분간 가벼운 산책을 했으며, 이후 역사 문제들, 한국-일본간 문제, 북한과 지역 현안들에 대해 초점을 모아 회담을 가졌다고 말했다.

===== 역사는 미래의 거울이다 =====

 3. (3급) 송외무장관은 회담초기 역사는 미래를 볼 수 있는 거울과 같은 것이며, 따라서 올바르지 못하거나 깨끗하지 못한 거울을 통해서는 왜곡된 인식을 가지게 될 것이라고 말하고선, 일본은 반드시 자신들의 역사와 주변국들간 사이에서 자신들의 미래 역할과 지역 관계간 증가된 의심과 같은 위험성을 명확하게 표현하도록 노력해야 한다고 소견을 피력했다고 이과장은 전했다. 송외무장관은 일본의 아베 수상이 위안부 문제와 관련해 일본 정부의 개입 거절 표명에 유감을 나타내었다. 일본 아소 외무장관은 아베 수상의 3월 26일 일본국회 연설은 1993년 고노성명서를 재확인하는 것이라고 고쳐 말하고는, 아베 수상의 사과를 표명했다. 이과장은 공식적인 언행에 더 숙련되었다고 평가되는 아베의 전임자 주니치로 고이즈미 수상 시절에서는 일어나지 않았을 최근 논쟁들에 대해서 애석해 했다.

 4. (3급) 일본 교과서 문제에 있어서, 서울과 도쿄는 회담에 앞서 자신들의 입장을 견지해 왔었다. 아소 도착 하루 전인 3월 30일 일본 문부과학성은 리앙쿠르 락스나 위안부 문제와 같이 논란의 여지가 있는 기술을 허용하거나 장려한 것으로 추정되는 고등 교과서에 대한 재검토의 초기 결과를 발표했었다. 외교통상부는 3월 30일 이에 대한 대응으로, 리앙쿠르 락스를 일본의 영토로 표기한 교과서를 승인한 일본 행정부의 참을 수 없는 행동에 대한 성명서를 발표했었다: 외교통상부는 또한 승인 철회를 요구했었다. 외교회담에서 아소 장관은 정부가 출판사에 그러한 교과서의 내용을 기술하라고 명령을 내린 적은 없고, 다만 지침만을 제공했을 뿐이었다고 언급한 것을 이과장은 전해 주었다. 송외무장관은 일반인들이 일본교과서와 일본 정부를 구별 짓지 않고 동일하게 생각하기 때문에 일본정부는 그 문제를 해결하기 위한 조치를 취해야 한다고 답변했었다. (주석: 4월 2일 한국의 한 지방 일간지는 일본 문부과학성이 한일 양국간에 위치한 바다를 동해라고 부르자는 한국의 요구를 무시하기 위해서, 그리고 오키나와 전투에서 일본군이 주민들에게 집단 자살을 명령했다는 부분을 삭제하기 위해서, 그리고 난징대학살의 사망자 수를 축소하고자 이에 대한 또 다른 견해를 포함시키기 위해서 교과서의 내용들을 변경해 왔었다라고 사설을 썼다. 주석 끝.)

 5. (3급) 야스쿠니 신사에 대해서, 송외무장관은 A급 전범들이 야스쿠니 신사에 합사되어 참배받아서는 안된다고 주장했다. 그러나 아소는 이 문제는 야스쿠니 신사 관리소가 결정짓는 것이지 일본 정부가 고려할 사항은 아니라고 답변했다.

 6. (3급) 만약 노대통령이 일본에 방문할 가능성이 있었다면, 송장관과 아소 장관이 이를 논의 했을까 라는 물음에 이과장은 7월 참의원 선거 전까지 노대통령의 방문은 “어려울 것”이기에 회담 전에 일본 정부가 이를 발표했을 것이다. 따라서 송장관과 아소 장관이 더 이상 이를 의논할 이유가 없었다고 말했다. 이과장은 아마도 일본은 노대통령의 방문에 의해 이 역사 문제가 더 돌출 될지 모른다는 점을 우려할 것이라고 말했다.

===== EEZ, FTA, 문화 교류 =====

7. (3급) 송장관과 아소장관은 2007년 상반기 내에 배타적 경제 수역(EEZ)에 관한 실무회의를 개최하는데 동의했다고 이과장은 말했다. EEZ는 3월 4일에 국장급 회담과 3월 11일-13일에 차관급 회담에서 다뤄졌었다. 하지만, 많은 사안들 중에서 한국이 받아 들일 수 없는 리앙크루 암초를 EEZ의 기점으로 사용하자는 일본의 주장은 중점 두고 살펴볼 사안이었다. 리앙크루 암초에 관해서 양국은 서로 다른 입장을 견지해 왔었다라는 아소장관의 발언에, 송장관은 한국정부는 그 섬에 대한 일본의 어떠한 요청도 받아 들일 수 없다고 되받아 쳤다. 올 봄에 일어난 양국간 해양조사 분쟁의 잠재성에 대한 질문에, 2005년 후반에 한국 정부가 해양 조사를 하겠다고 발표했었고, 일본은 어쩔 수 없이 대응 조사를 해야 한다고 느꼈기 때문에 2006년 그 문제가 나타나게 된 것이라고 이과장은 말했다. 그러나 이 문제에 있어서 한국뿐만 아니라 일본 정부 어디에도 2007년에 조사를 하겠다고 발표 하지 않고 있다. 따라서 사실상 이 문제에 있어 서로 한걸음 뒤로 물러난 상태이다. 이는 양국이 조사계획을 추진하게 된다면 상황은 변화할 수 있다. 송장관과 아소장관은 해상 국장급 회담 이외에도 중동과 미국에 대한 실무회의를 가지기로 동의했었다.


8. (3급) 아소장관은 6자 회담 이후로 2004년 후반에 중단된 한국-일본 FTA 회담 재개 필요성을 제기했다. 그러나 송장관은 사업의 첫 순서는 실무자 회의가 재개되기 전에 고위급 차원의 포괄적인 FTA 합의에 먼저 도달해야 한다고 주장했다. 일본 입장은 FTA를 실시하면 농산품 시장의 50%를 개방하기를 원하나, 한국은 75-80%의 개방을 원하고 있다고 이과장은 설명했다. 공통된 목표가 없다면 차기 한국 행정부가 들어서기 전에 FTA 협상 재개 전망은 낮다.

9. (3급) 긍정적인 면으로, 아소장관은 쌍방 교환 프로그램으로 향후 5년동안 매년 1000명의 한국 학생들을 초대했었다. 아베수상 행정부는 매년 6000명의 학생들을 초대하기 위해 계획을 확장시켜왔었고 이는 일본의 전체 교환 프로그램에서 1/6을 한국이 차지하게 되는 주목할만한 점이었다라고 이과장은 말했다.


===== 북한 =====

10. (3급) 송장관과 아소장관은 2월 13일 체결된 “초기 조치” 협정을 이행하기 위해 긴밀히 협력하기로 합의했었다. 아소장관은 이 협정이 일본인 납치 문제를 해결하는데 있어 또한 중요하다고 강조했었다. 송장관은 한국정부가 이 사안에 대해 일본이 민감하게 생각하고 있는 것을 잘 알고 있으며, 일본인들의 노력에 도움을 주기 위한 활동들을 제의해 왔었고 2월 27일-3월 2일 기간동안 진행된 남북한 장관급 회담에서 한국인과 일본인 납치 문제의 해결을 위해 북한측 협상단을 설득해 왔었다고 특별히 언급했다. 아소장관은 그러한 노력에 감사하게 생각한다고 말했었다.



===== 3국 외무장관 회담 =====

11. (3급) 송장관은 아소장관에게 한국의 제주도에서 6월 3일 리 중국 외무장관과 함께 3국 외무장관 회담을 가지자고 제안했었고, 이에 아소장관은 동의했었다. 중국의 입장은 어떠한가라는 질문에 이과장은 아직까지 최종 결정은 나지 않았지만, 중국당국이 긍정적인 신호를 보내왔었다고 말했다. 이과장은 1월달 필리핀 세부에서 열린 동남아시아 국가연합(ASEAN)+3국 정상회담에서 송장관이 에너지 문제와 한국, 일본, 그리고 중국이 석유를 수입하고 있는 중동 국가에 대해서 토론하기 위한 3국 회담을 처음에 제기했었다고 덧붙여 말했다.
버시바우













===== 원문 =====


C O N F I D E N T I A L SEOUL 000971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/03/2017 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON KS JA
SUBJECT: ROK-JAPAN MINISTERIAL TALKS DOGGED BY HISTORY 
 
 
Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Y. Yun.  Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: On April 2, MOFAT Northeast Asia Division I 
Director Lee Hee-sup told poloff that the March 31 - April 1 
talks between ROK Foreign Minister Song Min-soon and visiting 
Japanese Foreign Minister Taro Aso focused on history issues 
(comfort women, textbooks, Yasukuni) and included discussions 
of bilateral matters (Liancourt Rocks, EEZ, FTA, and cultural 
exchanges) as well as North Korea and Northeast Asia.  While 
the atmosphere was cordial, the ROK and Japanese positions 
were too far apart to allow much progress; the two sides did 
not discuss a visit to Japan by President Roh in 2007.  Lee 
said that Seoul, however, had received initial positive 
reactions to its initiative for a ROK-Japan-PRC Foreign 
Ministerial trilateral on June 3 in Korea.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) On April 2, Lee Hee-sup, Northeast Asia Division I 
(Japan) Director at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade, provided poloff a readout of the March 31 - April 1 
ministerial talks between ROK Foreign Minister Song Min-soon 
and visiting Japanese Foreign Minister Taro Aso on Jeju 
Island, South Korea.  Lee said that the two Ministers held a 
two-hour meeting on Saturday, March 31, followed by a 
two-hour dinner.  On Sunday, April 1, the ministers took a 
short walk together for about 10 minutes.  Talks focused on 
history issues, ROK-Japan matters, North Korea and regional 
subjects. 
 
------------------------------------ 
HISTORY IS THE MIRROR FOR THE FUTURE 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C) In his opening remarks, Foreign Minister Song 
commented that history was like a mirror to see the future, 
and that unless one had a proper and clear mirror, one would 
get a distorted perception, Lee said.  Japan must endeavor to 
clearly portray its history or risk, among other things, 
increased suspicion of its future role and regional 
relations.  Song expressed regret over Japanese Prime 
Minister Abe's remarks that suggested a denial of the 
Government of Japan's role in the comfort women issue. 
Japanese Foreign Minister Aso restated Abe's March 26 
comments to the Japanese Diet that reaffirmed the 1993 Kono 
statement and expressed Abe's apology as Prime Minister.  Lee 
lamented that the recent controversies would not have arisen 
under Abe's predecessor, Junichiro Koizumi, who Lee 
characterized as more skilled in public remarks. 
 
¶4.  (C) On Japanese textbooks, Seoul and Tokyo had trumpeted 
their positions ahead of the talks.  On March 30, a day 
before Aso's arrival, Japan's Education Ministry had 
announced initial results of its review of high school 
textbooks that had allegedly allowed, or encouraged, 
controversial descriptions of Liancourt Rocks and comfort 
women issues.  MOFAT in response, also on March 30, issued a 
statement that it was intolerable that the Japanese Ministry 
endorsed textbooks that described the Liancourt Rocks as 
Japanese territory; MOFAT also called for a withdrawal of 
that endorsement.  At the ministerial talks, Aso stated that 
Tokyo could not order publishers how to write textbooks and 
could only offer guidelines, Lee said.  Song responded that 
some would not differentiate between textbooks and the 
Japanese Government, so Tokyo should take steps to address 
the matter.  (NOTE: a local Korean daily on April 2 
editorialized that the Japanese Education Ministry had 
changed elements of the textbooks to ignore the ROK claim 
that the waters between the two countries were called the 
"East Sea," to delete readings that discussed the Japanese 
Army's order of mass suicide of civilians during the battle 
of Okinawa, and to include alternative views on the numbers 
of deaths in the Nanjing Massacre.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶5.   (C) On Yasukuni, Song argued that Class-A war criminals 
should not be honored in the Yasukuni Shrine.  Aso, however, 
noted that this issue was for Shrine officials to decide and 
that Tokyo did not consider this a state matter. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Asked if Song and Aso had discussed a possible visit 
to Japan by President Roh, Lee said that Tokyo had announced 
before the meeting that a Roh visit would be "difficult" 
ahead of July Upper House elections, so there was no reason 
for Song and Aso to discuss it further.  Lee opined that 
Japan would probably be concerned that a visit by Roh at this 
point would only give the history issue more prominence. 
 
---------------------------- 
EEZ, FTA, CULTURAL EXCHANGES 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Lee said that Song and Aso agreed to hold another 
round of working-level talks on Exclusive Economic Zones 
(EEZ) within the first half of 2007.  The EEZ had been 
discussed during Director-General talks on March 4 and at 
Vice Ministerial talks March 11-13, but one sticking point, 
among many, was that the Japanese insisted on using the 
Liancourt Rocks as a starting point for its EEZ, which the 
ROKG could not accept.  Aso noted that each capital had their 
own positions on the Liancourt Rocks, but Song countered that 
the ROKG would not accept any Japanese claim to the islets. 
Asked about the potential for dueling oceanographic surveys 
this spring, Lee offered that problems arose in 2006 when the 
ROK had announced its intention to conduct surveys in late 
2005 and the Japanese felt compelled to counter-survey.  At 
this point, however, neither Seoul nor Tokyo had made any 
announcements for 2007, so there was a de facto standown. 
This could change if either side decided to push ahead.  In 
addition to maritime DG talks, Song and Aso agreed to hold 
working-level talks to discuss the Middle East and the 
Americas. 
 
¶8.  (C) Aso raised the need to resume ROK-Japan FTA talks, 
which stopped in late 2004 after six rounds of meetings. 
Song, however, insisted that the first order of business 
should be to reach an understanding on a high-level, 
comprehensive FTA before working-level meetings resumed.  Lee 
explained the Japanese position to be that a FTA should open 
50 percent of the agricultural markets, but the ROKG wanted 
openings of 75 to 80 percent.  Without a common objective, 
the prospects for resuming FTA talks before the next ROK 
administration were low. 
 
¶9.  (C) On a positive note, Aso invited 1,000 South Korean 
students per year for the next five years on a bilateral 
exchange program.  Lee said that Prime Minister Abe's office 
had developed a proposal to invite 6,000 students per year 
and that it was notable that South Korea would get one-sixth 
of the slots. 
 
----------- 
NORTH KOREA 
----------- 
 
¶10.  (C) Song and Aso agreed to work closely to implement the 
February 13 "Initial Actions" agreement.  Aso emphasized that 
it was important to Tokyo to also make progress on the 
abduction issue.  Song noted that Seoul understood Japan's 
sensitivities and offered to do what it could to help 
Japanese efforts and during the February 27 - March 2 
inter-Korean ministerial talks had encouraged DPRK delegates 
to resolve the issue of Korean and Japanese abductions.  Aso 
said he appreciated that effort. 
 
--------------------- 
TRILATERAL FM MEETING 
--------------------- 
 
¶11.  (C) Song proposed to Aso that they hold a trilateral 
meeting with Chinese Foreign Minister Li on June 3 in Jeju, 
South Korea, and Aso agreed.  Asked for China's view, Lee 
said that Seoul had not received a final decision, but 
Beijing had sent some positive signals.  Lee added that at 
ASEAN Plus Three talks in Cebu, Philippines in January, Song 
had initially raised the idea for a trilateral meeting to 
discuss energy issues and the Middle East, given that South 
Korea, Japan and China were all oil importing nations. 
VERSHBOW